A report for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport


Realising the Benefits of 5G




  Final report for publication   August 2021    Cambridge Econometrics   gh@camecon.com
                                                Cambridge, UK            www.camecon.com
Any views expressed in this study are solely those of the author(s) and should not be taken to represent
 the Department of Digital, Culture, Media & Sport views or policy. This paper should not therefore be
                         taken as representing the views of the Department.

    The reader of this report should be aware that this research is an initial contribution to improving
  understanding on the topics covered and is based on evidence collected to date. The reader should
 consider new evidence that is made available after this report has been published and critically assess
                      any implications this may have on the findings outlined here.




     Cambridge Econometrics’ mission is to provide clear and useful insights, based on rigorous and
          independent economic analysis, to address the complex challenges facing society.
                                         www.camecon.com

                         Cambridge Econometrics Limited is owned by a charitable body,
                             the Cambridge Trust for New Thinking in Economics.
                                       www.neweconomicthinking.org

   Analysys Mason is a trusted adviser on telecoms, media and technology. We work with our clients,
   including operators, regulators and end users, to design winning strategies that deliver measurable
results, make informed decisions based on market intelligence and analytical rigour, develop innovative
  propositions to gain competitive advantage and implement operational solutions to improve business
      efficiency. With over 325 staff in 17 offices worldwide, we are respected internationally for our
 exceptional quality of work, independence and flexibility in responding to client needs. For 35 years we
            have been helping clients in more than 110 countries to maximise their opportunities.
                                          www.analysysmason.com




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                  2
Contents


                                                                     Page

1   Introduction                                                         9
    1.1 Background                                                       9
    1.2 Aims of the project                                             10
    1.3 Stakeholder engagement                                          10
    1.4 Structure of this report                                        11

2   Introducing 5G                                                      12
    2.1 What is 5G?                                                     12
    2.2 What does 5G offer users?                                       12
    2.3 Key features behind the transformative impact of 5G             15
    2.4 How 5G will compare with other connectivity technologies        16
    2.5 5G may be complementary or synergistic to other advanced
        technologies                                                    21

3   Applications and benefits of 5G                                     24
    3.1 5G consumer groups, sectors and use cases                       24
    3.2 Evidence on 5G use cases and consumer groups                    26
    3.3 Consumer group benefits and beneficiaries                       29
    3.4 The benefits of 5G                                              32
    3.5 Estimates of the magnitude of the benefits                      37

4   5G marketplace and readiness in the UK                              43
    4.1 Recent developments                                             43
    4.2 Spectrum used in UK MNO 5G deployments                          45
    4.3 Spectrum for private 5G deployment                              47
    4.4 Network architecture                                            50
    4.5 3GPP standards and releases                                     51
    4.6 Readiness to deploy and adopt 5G in the UK                      53
    4.7 Digital investment propensity assessment                        56

5   Barriers to adoption and their impact                               61
    5.1 Approach                                                        61
    5.2 Overview of the barriers to 5G adoption                         61
    5.3 Barriers to 5G adoption in the UK                               63
    5.4 Relevance of demand-side barriers within different consumer groups
        in the UK                                                        66
    5.5 Supply-side barriers – supporting evidence                      68
                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


     5.6 Demand-side barriers – supporting evidence                                 72

6    Modelling the adoption and benefits of 5G                                      80
     6.1 Overview                                                                   80
     6.2 Adoption and barriers model                                                80
     6.3 Disaggregating adoption                                                    83
     6.4 Economic benefits modelling                                                86
     6.5 Environmental benefits modelling                                           88
     6.6 Social benefits modelling                                                  89
     6.7 Challenges and limitations                                                 90

7    Scenario descriptions                                                          92
     7.1 5G adoption and impact scenarios                                           92
     7.2 Market barrier assumptions                                                 93
     7.3 Comparing results across scenarios                                         94

8    Analysis of scenario results                                                   95
     8.1 General introduction                                                       95
     8.2 Economic impacts                                                           96
     8.3 Environmental impacts                                                    118
     8.4 Social impacts                                                           122
     8.5 Benchmarking the model results                                           124

9    Conclusions                                                                  127
     9.1 5G use cases and consumer groups                                         127
     9.2 5G positioning relative to other connectivity technologies               127
     9.3 Barriers to 5G adoption                                                  128
     9.4 The role of private 5G networks                                          129
     9.5 Barriers that the market will address                                    129
     9.6 Economic impact modelling                                                129
     9.7 Environmental impact modelling                                           132
     9.8 Social impact modelling                                                  133

Appendices                                                                        135

Appendix A         Acronyms and Glossary                                          136
     A.1 Acronyms                                                                 136
     A.2 Glossary                                                                 138

Appendix B         Adoption curves                                                140

Appendix C         References                                                     143

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                4
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G



                      Executive Summary

  5G is the next      5G is the fifth and latest generation of mobile broadband internet, offering
     generation       faster speeds, as well as higher capacity, lower latency, increased flexibility
     technology       and increased reliability of connections. 5G can also connect a much larger
    standard for      number and variety of devices. In doing so, the expectation is that mobile
  mobile internet     telecoms companies will be able to address not only existing consumer and
                      business mobile broadband customers, but also new markets (such as
                      providing connectivity for low-latency Internet of Things (IoT) applications).
       Superfast      For individuals and households, greater capacity for the services they already
speeds are a key      use through faster mobile data connections could hold the biggest appeal in
    attraction for    terms of migrating from 4G, to 5G, use. In the longer term, new use cases in
     consumers        the area of gaming, entertainment, smart health and retail are expected to
                      emerge, as advanced features of 5G are deployed by MNOs and 5G devices
                      become more pervasive.
   The enhanced       The 5G opportunity is perhaps more significant for enterprises, as the
 functionalities of   additional features of 5G are well suited for industrial applications. These
 5G are expected      features include low-latency, virtualised RAN; multi-access edge computing;
   to unlock new      and network slicing. 5G is also an enabling feature for other technology
opportunities and     domains including robotics, IoT, and AR/VR. These enhanced functionalities
business models       of 5G are expected to unlock new business opportunities, new avenues of
                      supply and demand for 5G services and significantly contribute to economic
                      growth in the UK.
     Households,      The enhanced functionalities of 5G will support several new or enhanced use
       media and      cases. These include: virtual or augmented reality; ultra-high definition (UHD)
    entertainment     video; robotics; connected autonomous vehicles; drones; remote machine
and industrial IoT    manipulation; sensor networks; high-speed broadband; smart tracking; and
  are expected to     IoT. There is an expectation that the media and entertainment sector and
be early adopters     industrial IoT might be key areas of early adoption.
      There are       The identification and conceptualisation of the benefits of 5G adoption is
economic, social      relatively well evidenced (but evolving, as new use cases emerge). However,
            and       the quantitative evidence of these benefits is limited. The benefits of 5G can
  environmental       be categorised as:
     benefits of
                      •   Economic benefits – in the form of increased productivity to firms and
    adopting 5G
                          additional GDP growth or, alternatively, in terms of cost reduction. These
                          are realised through a wide range of mechanisms, including: reductions in
                          factory downtime; lower defect rates in manufacturing; energy efficiency
                          gains; and reduced waste. Other economic benefits are linked to the
                          enabling effects of 5G: the creation of new business models and
                          businesses or the launch of new products or services.
                      •   Social benefits – including time savings linked to increased productivity in
                          housekeeping and reduced travel times; and, from some 5G use cases,
                          increased life expectancy, improved public safety, better health, reduced
                          loneliness, and overall improvements in self-assessed quality of life and
                          life satisfaction metrics.
                      •   Environmental benefits – typically arising as a result of efficiency gains
                          related to transport activities and the consumption of energy and natural
                          resources; and so including reductions in traffic congestion and
                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 5
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


                           greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, reductions in the use of energy, and
                           lower consumption of natural resources, such as water.

       5G is being     5G networks are being expanded, largely on the basis of population density, to
 rolled out but the    address a diverse range of users and uses. This is being supported by the
   implementation      government’s 5G Test beds and Trials programme, which aims to accelerate
      of advanced      the roll-out and use of 5G, and the recent widening of spectrum available for
functionalities will   5G. Even so, it takes time for new 3GPP-based functionalities to be integrated
         take time     into networks and devices. The implementation of future 3GPP functionalities
                       and the availability of reliant use cases will depend on demand and cost and
                       likely be sporadic.
To date, most 5G       To date, deployment of 5G by MNOs has been non-standalone rather than
        has been       standalone. However, standalone networks, which operate independently of
deployed on non-       4G, are important because they enable operators to offer more bespoke
      standalone       solutions, and furthermore many new features and functionalities will rely on
        networks       the deployment of standalone networks. The pace of the transition to
                       standalone networks will dictate when more advanced 5G applications
                       become available.
  There is a role,     MNOs’ slow implementation of the latest functionalities into public networks is
 and support, for      stimulating demand for private 5G networks, while their longer transition to
 private networks      standalone presents an opportunity for private networks in the early delivery of
                       some 5G features. Ofcom has taken steps to support the deployment of
                       private 5G networks via shared use licences, and is making it easier for third
                       parties to access spectrum from the national spectrum holdings of MNOs for
                       local use.
 5G readiness in       After the first 5G networks launched in the UK in 2019, 5G coverage in the UK
         the UK is     was around 30% of the population as of Q4 2020, slightly above the European
 reasonably high       average of around 25%, based on analysis undertaken by Analysys Mason at
    but users are      that time, using data from the GSMA. Coverage has since expanded across
  unwilling to pay     further locations in the UK, with network speeds varying based on the
    when the use       deployment used by different operators in different locations. 5G readiness in
       cases and       the UK is reasonably high and the UK is a leader in the adoption of public
  benefits are not     cloud and AI.
              clear
                       Some wider digital barriers that may impede adoption of 5G in the UK include:
                       alignment with global standards and spectrum arrangements and the impact of
                       this on the wider 5G ecosystem; the absence of relevant skills and low levels
                       of technology maturity; the availability and cost of spectrum; access to fibre
                       backhaul. At the same time, the absence of a clear business case can
                       undermine 5G coverage and available 5G functionalities, while demand from
                       consumers may be slow to emerge until a live network demonstrates the
                       functionalities and use cases, which requires costly and risky investment. Key
                       barriers among users include an unwillingness to pay, especially when the use
                       cases and benefits are not clear.
     5G will bring     Incremental benefits of 5G over 4G include larger data transfers, the ability to
       incremental     maintain connections with very low latency, the ability to deliver contextual
 benefits over 4G      information in real time and the ability to connect many devices, and process
  but it could also    and utilise data from those devices, in real time. 5G may also have more
        have more      transformative impacts than previous mobile network technologies, through
   transformative      enabling other technological advances such as industrial AR/VR applications,
           impacts     robotics systems and cloud computing.

                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                                6
                                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


    Modelling the     The absence of empirical data on how 5G is being used and by whom, limits
 impacts of 5G is     the extent to which a model can be populated with data and parameters based
   subject to high    on real world experience. This meant we had to rely on estimates and
         levels of    assumptions from historical studies of comparable technologies to develop
      uncertainty     some of the model parameters.
   The strength of    Considering the challenges to modelling 5G impacts, the model has been
 the model lies in    designed to break down the distribution of the benefits across consumer
        comparing     groups, households and firms, and geographical areas. The scale of the
  relative impacts    impacts of 5G are highly uncertain, but the likely relative impacts of 5G will be
  across different    driven, to some extent, by the profile of 5G adoption. A further strength of the
    market barrier    model lies in the functionality to change the profile of adoption according to
             levels   different market barrier levels, to explore how these market barriers may affect
                      both the scale and the distribution of the benefits.


We modelled the       We modelled impacts of 5G adoption and demand-side market barriers for two
    impacts of 5G     scenarios:
     adoption and
                      •      an optimistic view of 5G as a general-purpose technology (GPT) that could
  market barriers
                             be adopted by nearly all firms, like the internet is currently;
for two scenarios
                      •      a more nuanced view of 5G in which adoption varies across consumer
                             groups and firm sizes based on trends in uptake of advanced digital
                             technologies (ADT)

The nature of 5G      The scenarios described above reflect differing opinions in the literature and
      adoption is     industry of the nature of future 5G use and how widespread adoption will be.
  uncertain, and      There is considerable uncertainty around which of these scenarios is more
       hence the      likely, and hence the potential size and scale of the impacts of 5G adoption.
     impacts are      There is hence wide variation in the size of impacts between model scenarios
   uncertain too      and model results should be interpreted in the context of the scenario they
                      correspond to.
   UK economic        UK economic benefits 1 are projected at £41bn-£159bn cumulatively over
    benefits are      2021-35 depending on the model scenario. Annual UK gross value added is
    projected at      projected to be 0.4%-1.6% higher in 2035 as a result of 5G technology (which
  £41bn-£159bn        is a relatively conservative estimate compared to the wider literature). Firms in
cumulatively over     the High-speed broadband to homes and offices consumer group and the
         2021-35      Media and entertainment consumer group are projected to experience the
                      largest impacts in proportional terms, though firms across a wide range of
                      consumer groups are projected to benefit from 5G adoption.
5G adoption will      The largest impacts are estimated in London (£42bn in the GPT scenario and
positively impact     £12bn in the ADT scenario), the South East (£23bn in the GPT scenario and
  GVA in all UK       £5bn in the ADT scenario) and the South West (£15bn in the GPT scenario
     regions and      and £4bn in the ADT scenario). Urban areas within-each region and country
        countries     are expected to benefit more strongly from 5G because it will be rolled out
                      there first, and in the ADT scenario because faster adopting consumer groups
                      are more highly concentrated in urban areas.


                      1
                          Economic benefits are measured in terms of gross value added (GVA), which is defined as the value of
                      output minus the value of intermediate consumption. This is of interest because GVA is the source of
                      primary incomes in an economy; GVA is equal to the total remuneration to households (via salaries and
                      wages) plus the total surplus of businesses (including profits) plus net taxes to government from production.

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                     7
                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


Private networks     The model results indicate that private networks may be particularly important
          may be     to rural areas if the slower roll-out of public networks in rural areas stimulates
      particularly   demand for private networks as an alternative. Furthermore, rural areas may
    important for    also have a relatively high share of firms in consumer groups, such as
      rural areas    Manufacturing, logistics and distribution and Energy and utilities, which favour
                     the specific use cases for which private networks offer an advantage.
  Environmental      Environmental benefits modelled as avoided emissions are projected at
  benefits range     ranging from 58-185 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent over 2021-35. Avoided
    from 58-185      emissions are greatest in consumer groups for which 5G improves transport
  mtCO2e saved       efficiency or reduces travel, such as the Transport consumer group and the
   over 2021-35.     Retail and hospitality consumer group.
   5G could save      The literature review found multiple channels through which 5G will bring
      individuals     social benefits. However, limited evidence exists on the potential magnitude
    £14.9-19.7bn      of most of these benefits. Therefore, modelling undertaken in this study was
    over 2021-35     limited to estimating the value of time saved on housework and family care by
                     individuals. The cumulative value of time saved over 2021-35 is projected to
                     reach £14.9-19.7bn.
        Removing     Smart urban and Manufacturing, logistics and distribution stand to gain the
  market barriers    most from lowering market barriers. £17bn-£58bn in additional GVA could be
       could bring   realised from reducing 5G market barriers in these two consumer groups
further economic,    alone (69-77% of total additional GVA benefits from lowering market barriers).
    environmental    Consumer groups for which business use cases were modelled are projected
        and social   to realise relatively higher emissions savings as a result of removing market
          benefits   barriers, with the highest potential additional savings in Rural industries (73%),
                     Manufacturing, logistics and distribution (41%), Smart urban (33%) and
                     Energy and utilities (32%). Removing barriers to adoption of 5G could also
                     potentially unlock £1.8-2.4bn of additional benefits to individuals.




                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 8
                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G



1        Introduction

1.1      Background
The telecoms market is undergoing a transition to 5G networks and full-fibre
broadband. 5G is expected to be a transformative technology that will create
opportunities through new advanced use cases across sectors and markets
for various consumer groups (e.g. households, enterprises, authorities etc.
simply referred to as consumers henceforth).
5G is expected to significantly enhance digital connectivity in the UK, with
initial 5G services launched by UK mobile network operators (MNOs)
predominantly targeting individual consumers of mobile broadband (MBB)
services. For these users, 5G radio means greater capacity for the services
they already use on smartphones and other mobile devices. Beyond
enhancing speeds and functionality of 4G, 5G standalone architecture is
expected to unlock the more advanced technical functionalities of 5G, such as
the ability to tailor quality of service through customised, end-to-end virtual
network slices meeting new and different user requirements such as low-
latency, ultra-reliable use cases.
These enhanced functionalities of 5G are expected to unlock new business
opportunities, new avenues of supply and demand for 5G services and
significantly contribute to economic growth in the UK (e.g. through increased
productivity, new business models, new products and services, new markets
and new use cases for various consumer groups).
In 2018, the UK government published the findings of its Future Telecoms
Infrastructure Review (FTIR). The objective of the review was to support
“large-scale commercial investment in the fixed and wireless networks that are
vital for the UK to remain globally competitive in a digital world”.
This vision forms a key aspect of the government’s growth strategy, and is
intended to ensure that the UK is at the forefront of the worldwide roll-out and
take-up of high-speed connectivity services. Achieving this objective requires
a strong market for 5G both on the demand-side and on the supply-side.
Against this background, the Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport
(DCMS) has launched a pre-emptive review of 5G deployment and adoption in
the UK. The objective is to understand the likely applications of 5G technology
(use cases), the sectors that will benefit most from these capabilities, the
barriers to take-up of 5G services, and an understanding of the overall
economic impact generated by the success or failure of 5G roll-out in the UK.
While the market is expected to operate effectively to drive the delivery of 5G,
there are various constraints that may impede this. For example, there are
barriers to engagement on both demand and supply sides; divergence in
incentives of suppliers and consumers; and complex transaction costs. These
can result in sub-optimal outcomes for consumers, meaning the UK does not
maximise the value of 5G.
In January 2021 DCMS appointed Cambridge Econometrics, Analysys Mason
and Professor Ed Oughton to conduct analysis to help them better understand
the demand side of the 5G market, the drivers and benefits of adoption, and
the impact of barriers to adoption on the realisation of benefits. The work will

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                9
                                                           Realising the Benefits of 5G


assist in identifying areas in the market where there might be a need for
government policy to support and promote the take up of 5G by users.

1.2       Aims of the project
In this context, this study seeks to provide a better understanding of the
demand side of the 5G market, and the opportunities and challenges (barriers
to adoption) various UK consumer groups of 5G will face. This project will
provide an initial contribution to better understanding these areas which
DCMS may seek to collect further evidence on as part of their ongoing
research programme and internal evidence collection. The consumer groups
represent related sectors of the economy and users of 5G within each of the
consumer groups considered in this study are a mixture of individual
consumers, households, businesses and the public sector (see section 3.3 for
further discussion of this).
The key outputs of this study are UK-wide 5G adoption curves and a benefits
model, which uses the adoption curves together with UK 5G geographic roll-
out assumptions as its inputs to understand the potential scale of the benefits
of 5G and the impact of removing barriers to adoption.
More specifically, this study has the following scope:
      •   Assessment of UK-wide 5G consumers (and consumer groups) and
          the 5G features that different consumer groups might use, informed by
          stakeholder interviews conducted as part of this study
      •   Identification and assessment of evidence underpinning the expected
          5G benefits for UK consumers across the different consumer groups
          (e.g. businesses, households etc.) and development of a benefits
          model to quantify the benefits of 5G in the UK
      •   Identification and analysis of barriers and market failures that may
          prevent 5G consumers or consumer groups from getting the best and
          maximum value from 5G, also informed by stakeholder interviews

1.3       Stakeholder engagement
As part of the study, and to supplement the available literature on what use
cases 5G might enable in the UK market, we conducted 16 one-to-one
interviews with a range of 5G stakeholders. We also hosted a workshop via
MS Teams, which was attended by more than 30 participants from 14 different
organisations across the UK. The workshop and interviews focused on the
topics of 5G demand, participants’ outlook for 5G adoption – and the key
consumer groups and potential use cases driving that – as well as any
potential barriers and market failures to 5G adoption that they have
experienced, or are aware of.
It is noted that we actively sought to interview stakeholders who were known
to be actively considering 5G solutions (and/or companies either developing
5G products or deploying them), given the detailed nature of the questions
being posed. Hence the stakeholder feedback will not be fully representative
of all businesses within a 5G consumer group given there will be a wide
variety of 5G awareness amongst businesses within specific groups. Given
the commercial sensitivity of the information provided, the identity of all
stakeholders engaged through the workshop and/or interviews, and any


Cambridge Econometrics                                                             10
                                                             Realising the Benefits of 5G


reference to them in the report, has been withheld. Nonetheless, the
information provided fed into and helped shape the analysis.

1.4      Structure of this report
The report provides our assessment of 5G demand and market barriers for
key consumer groups in the UK. It also provides an overview of our approach
to modelling 5G impacts, scenario design and analysis of economic,
environmental and social impacts projected using the model. The report is
structured as follows:
•     Chapter 2 provides an introduction to 5G to provide a high-level
      understanding on what 5G is and what it offers.
•     Chapter 3 provides an overview of the main use cases and who the main
      consumer groups are expected to be, along with an overview of the main
      benefits of 5G.
•     Chapter 4 provides an overview of recent developments in the evolution of
      the 5G market, to help understand the current state of development of the
      UK 5G market and how that is likely to change in future.
•     Chapter 5 describes the key barriers that might affect 5G adoption across
      the consumer groups, and also how we might reflect the impact of these
      barriers within the adoption forecasts developed from the study.
•     Chapter 6 describes our approach to modelling 5G adoption in the UK and
      estimating the economic, environmental, and social benefits.
•     Chapter 7 describes the scenarios we have developed for the modelling.
•     Chapter 8 presents and analyses the results from the scenario modelling.

•     Chapter 9 concludes the report and summarises findings and insights.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                               11
                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G



                      2        Introducing 5G

                      In this chapter we provide an introduction to 5G to provide a high-level
                      understanding what 5G is, the key features behind its potentially
                      transformative impact, and how it compares to other connectivity technologies,
                      such as 4G, wi-fi or fibre, and advanced technologies, such as the IoT or cloud
                      computing.

                      2.1      What is 5G?
  5G is the next      5G is the fifth and latest generation of mobile broadband internet. It is the
     generation       successor to existing standards such as 3G and 4G. 5G is expected to
     technology       significantly enhance digital connectivity in the UK, with initial 5G services
    standard for      launched by UK mobile network operators (MNOs) predominantly targeting
  mobile internet     individual consumers of mobile broadband (MBB) services.

                      2.2      What does 5G offer users?
    5G networks       5G networks will provide an increase in mobile speeds, as well as higher
    offer several     capacity, lower latency, increased flexibility and increased reliability of
 benefits beyond      connections. 5G can also connect a much larger number and variety of
       just faster    devices. In so doing, the expectation is that mobile telecoms companies will
          speeds      be able to address not only existing consumer and business mobile
                      broadband customers, but also new markets (such as providing connectivity
                      for low-latency IoT applications).
       Superfast      For consumers, including individuals and households, 5G means greater
speeds are a key      capacity for the services they already use on smartphones and other mobile
    attraction for    devices. 5G MBB therefore offers faster mobile data connections for video
     consumers        downloads, live streaming and gaming, offering a step change in quality of
                      experience for these services compared to slower, 4G-based MBB.
                      In the longer term, more consumer use cases in the area of gaming (e.g.
                      AR/VR gaming, cloud gaming), entertainment (e.g. 360-degree experiences,
                      holographic events), smart health (e.g. wearables, remote health monitoring),
                      retail (e.g. immersive shopping experiences, drone delivery) are expected to
                      emerge as advanced features of 5G are deployed by MNOs and 5G devices,
                      including but not limited to smartphones, become more pervasive.
   The enhanced       The 5G opportunity is perhaps more significant for enterprises, as the
 functionalities of   additional features of 5G are well suited for industrial applications:
 5G are expected
                      •     Low-latency, virtualised RAN: by changing the physical layer of radio
   to unlock new
                            frequencies, it is possible to transmit short packets of information with a
opportunities and
                            very short delay, which, along with edge computing functionality (see
business models
                            below), enables very low latency connection such as needed for the real-
                            time control of machinery or support for critical safety functions. With
                            reduced signalling for short packets, the number of concurrent connections
                            can also be increased to support many more devices, such as those
                            envisaged as forming part of IoT.
                      •     Multi-access edge computing: in the context of multi-access computing, it
                            is possible to process data at the edge of the network, using virtualised
                            platforms near to a company’s premises. This reduces delay and allows for
                            control and access to data without third-party involvement, which is

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                              12
                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


      particularly important for analytics, where data needs to be processed
      quickly.
•     Network slicing: communication paths can be allocated for the sole use of
      certain applications. The network is divided into a number of multiple
      virtual networks, all existing on a single infrastructure and each slice being
      configured to operate with specific quality-of-service (QoS). There is less
      cross-over between applications, more efficient use of resources and
      improved reliability and security.

5G is also an enabling feature to other technology domains (e.g. robotics, IoT,
AR/VR), and is expected to catalyse further adoption of these adjacent
technology both in the consumer and enterprise segments. For example:
•     Robotics: low latency network feature enables a user to make real-time,
      precise actions based on the robot’s surroundings from a remote
      environment.
•     IoT: 5G brings about greater flexibility in terms of type of devices, and
      number of devices supported in the core network.
•     Augmented reality (AR)/ virtual reality (VR): High bandwidth capabilities
      bring higher quality content which can be more realistic and immersive,
      while low latency enables content delivery with minimal delay for greater
      comfort.

These enhanced functionalities of 5G are expected to unlock new business
opportunities, new avenues of supply and demand for 5G services and
significantly contribute to economic growth in the UK (e.g. through increased
productivity, new business models, new products and services, new markets
and new use cases for various consumer groups).
It is very likely that once 5G networks are fully rolled out, a large part of the
overall benefits of 5G to national economies will be generated by key
consumer and enterprise use cases, through either economy-wide effects or
significant productivity gains within economically important sectors. The most
economically important sectors will vary across markets – however, the
potential range of applications and sectors where 5G technology might play a
role is significant.
A good source of case studies for the applications of 5G are reports on the
UK’s 5G Testbeds and Trials Programme. Table 2-1 below summarizes the
findings for a selection of these reports, covering a variety of use cases.


Table 2-1: Summaries of case studies from the 5G Testbeds and Trials Programme

    Author          Title            Summary
    DCMS (2019)     5G Testbeds      The paper provides some description of uptake in the
                    and Trials       case scenarios (consortia of over 70 organisations
                    Programme        including over 40 SMEs).


                                     The paper also describes progress in the 6 key
                                     testbed areas:
                                     •   AutoAir – a demonstration took place in
                                         Millbrook to “…help accelerate the development


Cambridge Econometrics                                                                     13
                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


                                            of the generation of connected and autonomous
                                            vehicles”.
                                        •   5G Rural First - 5GRF launched their Me+Moo
                                            app showcasing one of their agritech use cases.
                                            To date, they have had over 11,000 downloads
                                            on the app store.
                                        •   Worcestershire – The testbed has reportedly
                                            “…help[ed] factories make significant efficiency
                                            gains.”
                                        •   5G Smart Tourism – Demonstrations of VR and
                                            tourism took place (e.g. Roman Baths, Bristol).
                                        •   5GRIT - Within the rural broadband space, their
                                            service has shown that 5G can deliver 30Mbps
                                            broadband to remote rural areas.
                                        •   Liverpool 5G Testbed - The new technology has
                                            also improved the quality of life for people
                                            managing long term health conditions.


 Liverpool 5G       Benefits,           This paper analyses and presents evidence relating to
 Health and         Outcomes and        the economic and social impacts of the Liverpool
 Social Care        Impact:             Health and Social Care testbed.
 Testbed (2019)     Final analysis of   •   Cumulatively, it estimated that the combined
                    combined data           cost-savings for health and social care services
                    from use cases          across various 5G applications amounted to
                                            £247,688 per hundred users per year.
                                        •   Social impacts are also found in terms of
                                            reported life satisfaction and sense of inclusion
                                            among users.
 Sainani and        5G Rural            This paper analyses and presents evidence from the
 Lees (2019)        Integrated          5GRIT testbed relating to the economic impacts of
                    Testbed:            tourism apps, including an established AR application
                    Final Report –      called World Around Me (WAM) used to deliver video
                    Tourism Apps        streaming of heritage content over 5G.


                                        The paper establishes a direct relationship between
                                        WAM usage in the region and its economic benefits.
                                        •   WAM was used by 89 users who searched 1712
                                            times and spent 18hrs 12 mins in WAM.
                                        •   Based on this, the paper estimates that around
                                            £17,120 was brought into the region through
                                            these WAM users (£10 per use).
                                        •   If WAM were promoted to 10,000 people, who
                                            use WAM about 200,000 times, this would bring
                                            an economic benefit of £2 million to the region.
 Leese (2019a)      5G Rural            This paper analyses and presents evidence from the
                    Integrated          5GRIT testbed relating to the economic impacts of 5G
                    Testbed:            applications on arable land yield.
                    Final Report –
                    Arable Use          The paper considers the application of 5G in enabling
                    Cases               unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to collect multi-
                                        spectral images of arable land. This enables farmers
                                        to manage inputs (most importantly fertiliser).

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                          14
                                                                                           Realising the Benefits of 5G




                                                            These applications are found to increase average
                                                            farm wheat yields from 10.4 to 11.7 tonnes per
                                                            hectare. Based on a wheat price of £50 per tonne,
                                                            this equates to £195 per hectare in increased revenue
                                                            (approx.. £2395 per typical farm).


                                                            Ways in which these technologies might become
                                                            commercially viable are also explored and yardstick
                                                            goals for impacts on animal health is hypothesised.
                        Bruce (2019)       5G Rural         The paper describes testbed results including cost
                                           Integrated       savings for average sheep farms (fewer callouts and
                                           Testbed: Final   medical bills).
                                           Report –
                                           Livestock and    Consultations with farmers who were involved in the
                                           UAV              testbed were key to the research method.


                                                            The paper estimated that:
                                                            •   a 5% reduction can be achieved through UAV
                                                                applications, resulting in a cost saving of £0.34
                                                                pence per animal on veterinary products;
                                                            •   on a farm with 895 sheep (average size), this
                                                                would equate to £0.34x895=£304 per year;
                                                            •   1 call per year could be saved as a result of
                                                                monitoring the animals more closely;
                                                            •   This equates to a saving of £50-£90 p.a. based
                                                                on the current cost of a vet call out on these
                                                                farms.
                                                            •   Overall, both savings could amount to £350 -
                                                                £390 per year on the average sheep farm.




                       2.3      Key features behind the transformative impact of 5G
The virtualisation     It is the virtualisation and cloud-based transformation of 5G core networks that
of 5G networks is      is expected to drive the most transformative aspects of 5G, potentially leading
expected to drive      to the greatest benefits across industrial and enterprise 5G users. This
          the most     virtualisation of 5G architecture follows the broader trends of software-defined
    transformative     capabilities and cloud-based storage and implementation that is at the heart of
     aspects of 5G     industrial digital transformation programmes in the UK and worldwide.
     Key benefits      Virtualisation refers to the core networks of 5G being implemented in software,
  include greater      rather than in hardware. Additionally, virtualisation of parts of the radio access
        flexibility,   network (RAN) is occurring through virtual RAN solutions. Open RAN is one
   scalability and     example of a virtual RAN implementation. Key benefits of virtualised, cloud-
the decoupling of      based approaches to 5G implementation include greater flexibility, scalability
applications from      and decoupling of applications from hardware. Another benefit is that a move
        hardware       away from hardware-based implementation can potentially create
                       opportunities for alternative software-based vendors to provide some or all of
                       5G end-to-end solutions, improving supplier diversity.



                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                                       15
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


      But current    However, whilst virtualised 5G core network infrastructure solutions available
  virtualised 5G     in the market, early versions were not ‘cloud-native’. The first set of 5G
  core solutions     standards were completed as rapidly as possible to enable MNOs who wished
  are not ‘cloud-    to do so to roll out 5G quickly, and so the initial standards do not define the full
           native’   5G solutions. Initial 5G implementations in the UK used existing 4G core
                     networks to support 5G plus 4G connectivity although operators are now
                     moving to deploy cloud-native, container-based 5G packet core infrastructure,
                     which can be used to control 4G/5G ‘non-standalone’ radio networks, plus 5G
                     standalone services. Early implementations of 5G virtualised core networks
                     have also progressed in the private 5G market. Many 5G equipment vendors
                     are involved in multiple proof-of-concept and testbed programmes in the UK
                     and around the world demonstrating how 5G core network platforms are
                     evolving. Most often, early proof of concept is specific to individual use cases,
                     and may not be aligned with the vision of 5G offering multiple end-to-end
                     slices simultaneously able to meet different user requirements.
Many advanced        Virtualisation and ‘cloudification’ (making virtual 5G core networks compatible
 5G capabilities     with cloud implementations) is important because many of the advanced
         rely on     capabilities that are captured in the 5G vision (including ultra-low latency and
     virtualised     dynamic end-to-end slicing) rely on virtualised architectures being
  architectures      implemented. 5G SA architectures also promise to transform the total cost of
          being      ownership by reducing the cost of deploying large hardware solutions.
  implemented        Conversely, the transition from 5G non-standalone (NSA) to 5G SA raises
                     several complexities and requires significant support from equipment vendors
                     through implementation contracts. Hence the cost and complexity of this
                     transition may affect the timelines for these changes being made. A further
                     risk for MNOs is that current 5G core solutions are immature and not yet
                     proven for large-scale roll-outs. This means that timelines to deploy 5G core
                     networks have become misaligned with those to deploy 5G radio, since MNOs
                     have proceeded with deploying 5G radio, but without the corresponding 5G
                     core networks. This immaturity in 5G core solutions for large-scale roll-outs is
                     also one reason why it appears that MNOs have started to deliver 5G services
                     to industrial and enterprise users via private 5G networks, using shared-
                     access spectrum in the 3.8-4.2GHz band together with separate on-site core
                     networks serving specific customers. The evolution path from these disparate
                     networks towards fully cloud-native, end-to-end 5G networks being deployed
                     nationwide is not yet clear. Several of the barriers to deployment presented
                     later in this report stem from the uncertainty concerning this migration towards
                     end-to-end virtualised capability.

                     2.4      How 5G will compare with other connectivity technologies
 The usefulness      It is noted that some early adopters of 5G will previously have used 4G
        of 5G to     connectivity, and some 5G users have and may continue to use Wi-Fi and
 businesses that     other short-range wireless technologies for some of the use cases that 5G will
have invested in     support. Many businesses in the UK already rely on fixed broadband to
        existing     provide their main business connectivity. The Government’s full-fibre initiatives
technologies will    include a recent £5bn ‘Project Gigabit’ to target hard to reach homes and
            vary     businesses with next generation (fixed) broadband infrastructure. What 5G
                     offers for businesses that have invested in existing technologies will vary
                     depending on the nature of each business and the individual requirements that
                     businesses have.



                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                16
                                                                                         Realising the Benefits of 5G


  5G is being     Some potential UK 5G have made substantial investments to optimise existing
 rolled out as    connectivity solutions for their specific deployment and usage needs, included
      existing    fibre broadband, and wireless solutions, including Wi-Fi, public and private 4G
  connectivity    deployments. The roll-out of 5G is taking place at the same time as existing
technologies      wireless and fixed connectivity technologies (e.g. 4G, Wi-Fi, Fibre) are
expand their      expanding their capabilities (Figure 2-1). There are a wide range of existing
   capabilities   low power wireless solutions (‘short range devices’, or SRD) used in the UK
                  market and elsewhere for asset tracking, wireless sensing radio frequency
                  identification (RFID), and other uses. These short-range devices use spectrum
                  designed for SRD use, which is typically harmonised across Europe for such
                  purposes. Spectrum bands used for these purposes include the 2.4GHz band,
                  widely used around the world not only for Wi-Fi but also for a range of other
                  short-range, low power wireless connections (Bluetooth, zigbee, etc.).
                  Investment in 5G is taking place in the UK at the same time as significant
                  investment is being made into full-fibre implementation across the country.
                  Competition is driving local investment in fibre with several firms creating
                  alternative fibre infrastructures in the UK in competition with the incumbent
                  provider, Openreach. As evidenced by other published literature, 5G and fibre
                  together are expected to benefit individuals, businesses, Governments and
                  wider society through enabling increases in broadband speeds (Oxera for the
                  Broadband Stakeholder Group, 2019).
                   Figure 2-1: Existing connectivity technologies which are expanding their capabilities


                                                High speed mobile broadband, with the capacity provided
                              4G*               varying depending on spectrum used and density of
                                                infrastructure, together with 3GPP version (LTE/LTE-A)


                                                Wi-Fi 6 is the next generation of Wi-Fi technology with
                            Wi-Fi 6             improved speed and features to improve device efficiency,
                                                although with performance dependent on spectrum used


                                                Offers highest speed, low latency fixed connections into
                             Fibre              homes and offices, and also plays a role in mobile
                                                networks via offering high capacity fibre backhaul


                    LPWAN (NB-IoT, LoRa,        Low power and lower bit technologies that support high
                           etc.)                densities of connected devices, typically at lower bit rates


                      Short-range wireless      A range of proprietary short-range wireless technologies
                      (including dedicated      providing device to device connectivity, which includes
                              short-            DSRC, also referred to as IEEE802.11p, which is
                     range communications       designed to use the 5.9GHz band for vehicle to vehicle /
                       (DSRC), RFID etc).       vehicle to roadside connectivity (V2V and V2I)

                     *Deployed in multiple frequency bands in the UK with different bandwidths/range – 4G low
                     bands (800/900MHz) provide coverage but limited capacity, whereas 4G mid-bands
                     (1800MHz and 2100MHz) provide greater capacity. 2300MHz and 2600MHz bands are
                     also used for 4G (2300MHz is only available to one UK MNO), offering high capacity.
                     Some capacity in 900MHz, 1800MHz and 2100MHz is also used for legacy 2G/3G
                     connectivity currently.


                     Source: Analysys Mason.




                  Cambridge Econometrics                                                                         17
                                                                                                    Realising the Benefits of 5G


5G and fibre are   5G and fibre investment can be viewed as complementary in that 5G
 complementary     infrastructures will utilise fibre networks for backhaul purposes where
 technologies…     available.
    …as are 5G     As well as being overlaid onto 4G networks by MNOs to provide wide-area
 radio and Wi-Fi   coverage and mobility, 5G radio can also be deployed to provide localised
                   coverage (either outdoors, or indoors) to deliver use cases similar to those
                   provided by existing short-range wireless solutions such as Wi-Fi or other
                   proprietary short-range wireless technologies. These localised areas could be
                   indoors or outdoors (e.g. within an indoor business or factory setting, outdoors
                   in a factory yard or across an industrial campus).
                   Short-range wireless solutions such as Wi-Fi are limited to localised coverage
                   due to the stipulation of low transmit power and other restrictions placed on
                   use of licence exempt spectrum that these technologies use in the 2.4GHz or
                   5GHz band.
                   Existing Wi-Fi solutions are evolving currently with definition of a new ‘Wi-Fi 6’
                   specification. The consumer group, Which, have published a useful guide on
                   Wi-Fi-6 2.
                   5G and Wi-Fi both provide high data rates to support wireless data
                   applications, and the two technologies can co-exist together in several
                   environments (typical environments in which both 5G and Wi-Fi might be used
                   include in the home, in the office, while driving, or working remotely). There
                   are several key differences between the two technologies however, which are
                   summarised below:
                   •      5G technologies are standardised internationally by the Third Generation
                          Partnership Project (3GPP), which is a global standardisation group
                          formed of several regional standardisation bodies (such as the European
                          Telecommunications Standards Institute), and involving stakeholders
                          across the mobile industry, including large global mobile equipment
                          vendors and mobile operators. Wi-Fi is standardised by the IEEE, an
                          international standards organisation traditionally involving IT equipment
                          vendors.
                   •      Wi-Fi operates around the world using two spectrum bands, at 2.4GHz and
                          at 5GHz. In many markets, including Europe, additional spectrum in the
                          lower 6GHz band is being made available to give further capacity for Wi-Fi
                          use. Several markets (e.g. USA, Brazil, Saudi Arabia) have made further
                          spectrum available in the upper 6GHz band. In Europe, future use of this
                          upper 6GHz spectrum was under discussion at the time of producing this
                          report (as part of preparations for the ITU World Radiocommunication
                          Conference in 2023). Spectrum used for Wi-Fi is available on a licence-
                          exempt basis in most markets. This means that equipment can be installed
                          without individual licences being needed, provided the equipment complies
                          with the technical conditions for use of the 2.5GHz and 5GHz bands.
                          These technical conditions are designed to enable co-existence between
                          the different Wi-Fi systems that share the same 2.4GHz and/or 5GHz
                          bandwidth. Technical conditions include limits on transmitted power and
                          limits on the types of antenna that can be attached to a Wi-Fi system. As
                          such, Wi-Fi is a popular choice to provide localised coverage (e.g. inside a


                   2
                       https://www.which.co.uk/reviews/wi-fi-routers-and-extenders/article/what-is-wi-fi-6-agTTG2Y9Jeni

                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                   18
                                                                                Realising the Benefits of 5G


                        home or an office), where power and coverage limitations do not inhibit
                        use.
                    •   Wi-Fi is currently a popular choice for indoor wireless networks and will
                        continue to be used in this environment. Wi-Fi is not typically deployed
                        outdoors, although some outdoor deployments do exist. Whilst 5G
                        deployment is taking place using outdoor base stations currently, it is
                        envisaged that some 5G deployment will be indoors (e.g. using 3.5GHz or
                        26GHz small cells). Within the indoor environment therefore, 5G is likely to
                        be an alternative to deploying Wi-Fi. Conversely, where some users have
                        already invested in large-scale indoor Wi-Fi coverage, those users seem
                        unlikely to replace this Wi-Fi coverage with 5G for areas where Wi-Fi
                        already covers in the short term.
                    •   Where 5G and Wi-Fi networks potentially compete is therefore largely in
                        the indoor environment, where businesses who have invested in Wi-Fi
                        coverage might question the need for 5G. In the current market, a hybrid
                        model often applies to provide coverage to larger outdoor/indoor
                        environments such as campuses, stadiums and rail stations. This hybrid
                        model is enabled through consumer devices (smartphones, tablets etc)
                        having both cellular and Wi-Fi capabilities. Users who subscribe to a 4G
                        mobile network but also use a Wi-Fi-enabled device can therefore choose
                        which capability to use in different locations and circumstances. What is
                        likely to change in the 5G era is that the amount of data being transferred
                        will be considerably higher. This surge in data use is likely to lead to a
                        reduction in user experience and use case capabilities if relying on Wi-Fi
                        technology, given that the capacity of Wi-Fi is fixed (based on the amount
                        of spectrum available, which is also shared across the entire Wi-Fi
                        market). What 5G promises to deliver over and above Wi-Fi in
                        environments such as stadiums, indoor enterprise or industrial settings, is
                        very high capacity (both for downlinks and uplinks) to address very large
                        amounts of data. It is also possible that 5G deployment might better
                        address some types of indoor use (such as covering a building with
                        several floors, for example).
                    •   In summary, both Wi-Fi 6 and 5G will offer improved user experience
                        through lower latency and higher bandwidth compared to the respective
                        previous generations of those technologies (i.e. Wi-Fi 6 provides
                        performance improvements over previous generations of Wi-Fi technology
                        and 5G provides improvements over 3G/4G).
                    •   5G, however is expected to differentiate itself from Wi-Fi 6 (as 4G does
                        over existing Wi-Fi solutions) by providing wide-area mobility with longer
                        network ranges as well as native core / network slice integration
                        capabilities.

  4G and 5G will    Similarly, 4G and 5G are expected to act as complementary technologies in
    complement      the short term as operators continue to expand 5G networks and rely on
each other in the   current 4G coverage, with more immediate use cases largely focused on
      short term    providing 5G-based mobile broadband to individual consumers and
                    businesses. According to GSMA’s ‘The Mobile Economy 2020’ report (2020),
                    4G connections accounted for 52% of mobile connections worldwide in 2019
                    and is still expected to see some further growth in the next five years. It is
                    evident however, that some of the more transformative benefits of 5G,
                    compared to previous mobile technologies, are still some years away and are
                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                              19
                                                                                                 Realising the Benefits of 5G


                   dependent on the full portfolio of 5G spectrum bands (medium and high
                   frequencies) and virtualisation of the 5G core (see Figure 2-2).




                   Figure 2-2: Transformative benefits of 5G enabled through in mid- and high-band
                   frequencies together with virtualisation of the 5G core

                                                     Ultra-fast, low latency*, mobile connectivity, which,
                       5G mid band (3.5GHz) /
                                                     together with 5G core networks (inc. cloud-based) and
                        5G high band (26GHz)
                                                     edge cloud, enables end-to-end, dynamic slicing


                                                     Higher-speed, lower latency overlay to 4G (but without mid
                       5G low band (700MHz)          band/high band and 5G core, is unlikely to deliver high
                                                     capacity or end-to-end slicing on its own)


                                                     Re-farming of existing spectrum from 3G/4G use to 5G,
                                                     which is also enabled through various technology solutions
                       5G using existing mobile
                                                     offered by major vendors (such as Ericsson spectrum
                               bands
                                                     sharing, enabling an MNO to share spectrum within its
                                                     network between 4G and 5G traffic)


                                                     ▪   Cloud refers to on-demand IT services used by
                                                         enterprises and businesses delivered over the internet
                                                     ▪   Edge computing helps remove latency limitations
                         Edge computing and
                                                         between networks and devices
                          Cloud computing
                                                     ▪   5G core network refers to virtualising the core network
                                                         topology – cloud-native refers to taking this topology
                                                         into the cloud

                       Note: * Depending on deployment used

                       Source: Analysys Mason.


 The benefits of   The capabilities of 5G compared to 4G are discussed extensively in published
5G compared to     reports. Some of the reported benefits of 5G as compared to 4G ( (GSMA
             4G    2020), (5G.co.uk 2020), (Analysys Mason 2018)) are outlined below:
                   •      5G may enable a large amount of spectrum to be aggregated – even
                          across different frequency bands – to achieve higher peak/average speeds
                          (both uplink and downlink)
                   •      5G.co.uk (5G.co.uk 2020) reported that 4G real-world download speeds
                          averaged 20-30Mbit/s, where 5G real world speeds sat at 150Mbit/s-
                          1Gbit/s. 3 However, the expectation is that 5G speeds could increase to
                          10Gbit/s (>1000x greater than that achieved by 4G) as stand-alone
                          networks develop
                   •      In addition to higher speeds, 5G is expected to provide much improved
                          latency when compared to 4G, i.e. 21-26ms versus 50ms. Theoretically,
                          5G latency could reach 1ms, however, substantial networks
                          enhancements will be required before that is achieved
                   •      5G is expected to make use of associated technologies (e.g. mobile edge-
                          cloud, AI, small cells) for the development of agile and dynamic networks,

                   3
                       Opensignal report (Opensignal 2019) found that the top 5G speed reached by any MNO network in the UK
                   was 599Mbit/s (between April-September 2019).

                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                20
                                                                                Realising the Benefits of 5G


                          providing superior speeds, latency and coverage required for use cases
                          enabled by 5G. (see standalone Appendix A for a full list of 5G use cases)
                    •     In previous cellular network evolutions, 4G was noted for providing
                          significant speed improvements compared to 3G for mobile data use. As
                          well as providing further improvements in speeds compared to 4G, 5G is
                          also expected to facilitate the emergence of new use cases, not currently
                          possible through other mobile technologies. (see standalone Appendix A
                          for a full list of 5G use cases)
                    •     Network slicing capabilities (born through 5G networks) will support the
                          provision of end-to-end dedicated capacity and tailored uplink/download
                          speeds
                    •     Currently, 4G offers superior coverage to 5G as continue to expand 5G
                          networks. The aim however, is for 5G networks to dynamically provide the
                          ‘perception’ of ubiquitous coverage by predicting user capacity
                          requirements and movements, thus providing seamless and sufficient
                          network availability

 The benefits of    In summary, the speed improvements from 5G versus 4G appears to be well
      5G extend     documented, however, some published documents (including from the mobile
     beyond just    industry itself) indicate that other benefits of 5G might be less well understood
  faster speeds,    currently. The GSMA for example refers to the benefits of 5G for enterprises
but are less well   not being realised until 5G stand-alone deployments are available. The GSMA
     understood     refers to the benefits of capabilities such as network slicing, edge computing
                    and low latency services taking time to penetrate the market, resulting in a risk
                    that some users believe that 4G remains ‘good enough’ (GSMA 2020).
                    It is clear that current 5G services will evolve as MNOs continue to upgrade
                    their networks. These further infrastructure upgrades and network functionality
                    investments and enhancements will be required for full 5G benefits (e.g.
                    arising from superior latency performance, bespoke network slices and edge
                    computing) to be demonstrated.

                    2.5      5G may be complementary or synergistic to other advanced
                             technologies
    Five types of   The timing of 5G adoption may be complementary or synergistic to the
       advanced     emergence or maturation of other advanced technologies. There are five key
technologies that   types of associated technologies that either enable or benefit from 5G services
enable or benefit   and building up these technologies is important for 5G success, both from a
from 5G services    capability and ecosystem perspective – namely, IoT, cloud computing, AI, XR
                    and automation and robotics. 5G characteristics and capabilities (including
                    those that are still expected to emerge through future 3GPP releases and
                    network investments) are likely to enhance the experience of these advanced
                    technologies. Additionally, experience may also be enhanced through the
                    improved connectivity service that 5G provides over other connectivity
                    technologies (e.g. 4G and Wi-Fi). This improvement in connectivity and
                    service from 5G (e.g. lower latency, higher bandwidth and improved mobility
                    when compared to Wi-Fi) may provide impetus for adoption of advanced
                    technologies and associated use cases. Summaries of 5G-associated
                    advanced technologies are included below:




                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                              21
                                                                             Realising the Benefits of 5G


IoT (IoT)
•      5G enhances communication functionality for IoT connectivity and brings
       about greater flexibility in terms of type of devices, and number of devices
       supported in the core network (with 5G IoT capabilities being referred to as
       massive machine-type connections, or mMTC). However, in parallel to 5G-
       based mMTC being specified, 4G-based IoT solutions are still evolving
       and being deployed.
       •    NB-IoT is an LTE-based technology used for low power wide area
            applications like cameras traffic lights and environmental sensors,
            according to Vodafone’s website 4.
       •    LTE-M is also an LTE-based IoT technology providing higher-
            bandwidth IoT applications compared to NB-IoT. Telefonica’s website
            refers to LTE-M providing asset tracking, utilities monitoring and
            assisted living and smart city applications 5.
       •    NR-Light is a 3GPP Release 17 capability aimed at developing a new
            5G IoT device type meant to provide lower complexity and reduced
            energy consumption compared to previous generations of cellular IoT
            such as NB-IoT and LTE-M.

Cloud computing
•      Edge computing enables low latency 5G applications by bringing
       computing capabilities closer to the application.
       •    XR (eXtended reality, including augmented reality (AR), virtual reality
            (VR) and mixed reality (MR)) and audio visual devices can offload their
            computing resources to the edge network without suffering latency
            issues such that cost can be kept low and devices can be miniaturised.
       •    Remote control in machinery, vehicles, drones can be carried out with
            low latency for precise movements.

Artificial Intelligence (AI)
•      5G enables the proliferation of sensors and faster data transfer, enabling
       the collection and processing of increasing amounts of data. Better data
       inputs result in better AI models.
•      AI is important to 5G as it helps to make sense of the large volume of data
       to derive actionable insights.
•      AI can play a role in managing 5G networks through software.

eXtended reality (XR) – Augmented, virtual and mixed reality
•      High bandwidth capabilities bring better quality content to XR applications
       for a more realistic and immersive experience (e.g. high definition (HD)/4K
       content streaming to XR headsets).
•      Low latency capabilities enable content to be delivered with minimal delay
       for a more comfortable user experience.



4
    https://publicsector.vodafone.co.uk/services/vodafone-narrow-band-iot/
5
    https://www.o2.co.uk/business/solutions/iot/lte-m

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                               22
                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


•   XR adoption has not taken off as expected and the benefits promised by
    5G could potentially move the needle and catalyse mainstream adoption.

Automation and robotics (including drones)
•   There are two main types of automation and robotics applications:
    •    remote control where the application is being controlled by an operator
         in a separate location (e.g. control room/head office);
    •    autonomous where the application is being powered by an AI algorithm
         and carry out tasks without need for human intervention.
•   Remote control: low latency network feature enables a central control
    room to be able to make real-time, precise actions based on the robot’s
    surroundings. This can be applied to vehicles, construction machinery,
    plant equipment where real-time actions are critical to ensure safety.
•   Autonomous: low latency and edge computing helps the robots/drones
    make fast autonomous decisions such that timely responses can be made
    to ensure safety.
•   Network slicing is critical to robotics applications as network QoS can be
    guaranteed for effective and safe application.

Whilst it is understood that 5G-associated advanced technologies are likely to
enable or benefit from 5G services, it is clear that the emergence,
development and maturity of these advanced technologies are dependent on
an entire supply-chain to support them. This includes fully-deployed and
capable networks with sufficient coverage, as well as available and maturing
ecosystems providing productised and affordable devices with shorter lead
times.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                              23
                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G



                     3        Applications and benefits of 5G

                     This chapter provides an overview of the main ways in which 5G is expected
                     to be applied (the use cases) and who the main consumer groups are
                     expected to be. There then follows a summary of the benefits that are
                     expected to be derived from the exploitation of 5G across different consumer
                     groups.

                     3.1      5G consumer groups, sectors and use cases
                     Using evidence gathered from published literature, together with reports of use
                     cases being tested in the 5GTT programme, a list of 5G use cases was
                     developed for discussion with DCMS.
                     These cases were identified based on what has been presented in published
                     literature as being 5G-enabled use cases (i.e. benefitting from full capabilities
                     of 5G, such as use cases needing very high capacity, machine-type
                     connections, low latency and/or high reliability, and/or use cases where 5G
                     provides an improvement compared to existing solutions e.g. higher capacity
                     for eMBB, relative to 4G). The identified list of use cases was corroborated
                     through discussion with the DCMS team, along with the stakeholder workshop
                     and one-to-one stakeholder interviews conducted for this study (see Section
                     1.3). It is noted that within the scope of the study, it was not possible to
                     conduct one-to-one interviews with stakeholders from all of the identified 5G
                     consumer groups.
         Nine 5G     We then identified what sectors of the market will use the different use cases,
consumer groups      and we organised user sectors into nine key groups. Each of our nine ‘5G
    are identified   consumer groups’ represents several sectors of potential 5G users. For each
                     sector of use, there are multiple 5G use cases (or applications) that are widely
                     discussed in the literature we have reviewed.
                     Consumer groups and sectors are shown in Table 3-1. Consumer groups
                     therefore represent related sectors of the economy e.g. the public services
                     consumer group represents all public sector uses of 5G.
                     Each consumer group consists of a mixture of individual consumers, private
                     firms and the public sector, all of whom might be consumers of 5G. This is
                     further discussed in Section 3.3.


                     Table 3-1: Summary of consumer groups and sectors

                                  Consumer group                     Sector
                      1           Media and entertainment            1a   Gaming
                                                                     1b   Media
                                                                     1c   Venues and events
                      2            Public services                   2a   Health and social care
                                                                     2b   Education
                                                                     2c   Public safety and security
                      3           Energy and utilities               3a   Utilities
                                                                     3b   Oil and gas
                                                                     3c   Mining
                                                                     3d   Renewables


                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                   24
                                                                                                Realising the Benefits of 5G


                       4           Rural industries                            4a    Agriculture
                                                                               4b    Forestry
                                                                               4c    Fishing
                                                                               4d    Tourism
                       5           Smart urban                                 5a    Smart cities
                                                                               5b    Construction
                                                                               5c    Professional services
                                                                               5d    Tourism
                       6           Transport                                   6a    Public transport
                                                                               6b    Automotive
                                                                               6c    Airports
                                                                               6d    Water transport
                       7           Manufacturing, logistics and distribution   7a    Freight
                                                                               7b    Ports
                                                                               7c    Smart factories
                       8           High-speed broadband into homes and         8a    Homes
                                   offices                                     8b    Offices
                       9           Retail and hospitality                      9a    E-commerce
                                                                               9b    Hospitality

                      Source: Analysys Mason.


          Existing    An issue to consider when assessing demand for 5G services, and
technologies can      subsequently the benefits of 5G, is that some potential 5G users might already
  already support     use existing wireless technologies to address some of the use cases identified
     some 5G use      below. However, our assumption is that 5G infrastructure will provide
     cases but 5G     enhanced performance for these use cases, compared to using earlier cellular
 may enable new       technology (i.e. given that 5G infrastructure will offer higher capacity and
   use cases that     higher peak speeds, lower latency and higher reliability). New 5G architecture
           existing   will enable network functions to be handled in software, which will also enable
      technologies    new uses, and enhance existing ones, by enabling effective processing (and
   cannot support     AI-type analysis) of large volumes of data, for example. In addition, 5G will
                      introduce the definition and orchestration of network slices, to allocate network
                      resources dynamically and in a quality-managed way to different users and
                      applications. As such, 5G infrastructure might also enable entirely new use
                      cases that are not possible using today’s wireless infrastructure.
         New or       In our analysis we have sought to identify the capabilities of 5G which,
      enhanced        compared to previous generations of mobile technology, enable enhanced or
    applications      new uses that are expected to underpin 5G demand and adoption. We have
  enabled by 5G       referred to these capabilities as 5G-enabled applications or ‘5G applications’,
                      as described in Table 3-2.


                      Table 3-2: Description of 5G applications

                       5G applications                      Description
                       VR/AR                                Real-time, high-speed, low-latency and managed QoS
                                                            connectivity for VR/AR
                       UHD video                            Real-time, high-speed, low-latency support for UHD
                                                            video
                       Robotics                             Real-time, mission-critical, high-speed, ultra low-latency
                                                            and managed QoS connectivity for robotics


                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                            25
                                                                                                                                        Realising the Benefits of 5G


 Autonomous/connected vehicles                        Real-time, high-speed, ultra low-latency wide-area and
                                                      managed QoS connectivity for autonomous vehicles
 Drones                                               Real-time, low-latency, wide-area 5G connectivity for
                                                      drones
 Remote object/machine                                Real-time, mission-critical, high-speed, ultra low-latency
 manipulation                                         and managed QoS connectivity for remote object and
                                                      machine manipulation
 Sensor networks                                      Real-time, high-density, wide-area connectivity for
                                                      sensor network collation and data mining
 High-speed broadband                                 High-speed wireless broadband connectivity to homes
                                                      and offices

 Smart tracking                                       Real-time, wide-area 5G connectivity for smart tracking

Source: Analysys Mason.


A summary of key 5G applications per consumer group are presented in Table
3-3.


Table 3-3: Key 5G applications per consumer group

                                            1                    2                    3                    4                5            6                        7                         8                                       9
                                 Media and Entertainment




                                                                                                                                                 Manufacturing logistics


                                                                                                                                                                           High speed broadband
                                                                                                                                                                                                  into homes and offices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Retail and Hospitality
                                                                             Energy and Utilities


                                                                                                    Rural industries




                                                                                                                                                                              and distribution
                                                           Public services




                                                                                                                       Smart urban


                                                                                                                                     Transport



VR/AR

UHD video

Robotics

Drones

Remote object/machine
manipulation

Sensor networks

High-speed broadband

Smart tracking

Autonomous/connected vehicles


Source: Analysys Mason.



3.2        Evidence on 5G use cases and consumer groups
This section provides a discussion on 5G demand, use cases and relevant
consumer groups.


Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                                                                                                                                      26
                                                                                              Realising the Benefits of 5G


          Mobile      We found that initial deployment is being driven by a need to provide
      broadband       additional capacity for MBB consumers. Other uses of 5G such as industrial,
       demand is      transport, healthcare etc. are not widely served yet by public networks,
    driving initial   although several trials are being conducted in specific sectors (ports,
  deployment by       manufacturing, utilities), with a view to furthering the understanding of how 5G
MNOs as they do       might be deployed to meet these different requirements.
  not understand
                      We identified four key early adopters of 5G:
 other use cases
                      •      individual consumers;
                      •      media and entertainment;
       Evidence       •      broadband; and,
   identifies four
                      •      industrial IoT.
       key early
  adopters of 5G      Individual consumers were identified as obvious early adopters of 5G, driven
                      by eMBB focus from MNOs and new 5G handsets coming to market. Use
                      cases linked to eMBB capabilities include temporary mobile sites, improved
                      video download speeds (including UHD) and AR/VR. Other early adopters
                      include media and entertainment, and broadband in homes and offices (e.g.
                      FWA, eMBB connectivity). Industrial IoT is also highlighted as an earlier use
                      case of 5G when applied to manufacturing, energy and utilities, smart urban
                      and transport. Use cases dependent on later 3GPP releases (16/17), or those
                      demanding ultra-low latency, mission critical connectivity (automation,
                      robotics, AR/VR in surgeries etc.) using nationwide 5G networks will largely
                      depend on further investment being made to add these capabilities, which
                      may emerge at a later stage.
                      Table 3-4: Use cases relevant to different consumer groups

                          Consumer group         Use cases
                          Media and              UHD video consumption; content production; immersive and
                          entertainment          location-based digital experiences (e.g. interactive concerts,
                                                 holographic streaming and enhanced football games); live
                                                 media streaming
                          Public services        Temporary/mobile eMBB connectivity (e.g. vaccination
                                                 sites); mobility for public service workers; IoT deployments
                                                 for remote patient monitoring and predictions; ultra-reliable,
                                                 ultra-low latency uses cases such as AR/VR and robotics for
                                                 training and surgery (longer-term)
                          Energy and utilities   Large scale IoT deployment for utility networks; AR/VR for
                                                 underground network mapping; UHD off-site communications
                                                 and training; drones to analyse resource sites (e.g. quarries,
                                                 mines, reservoirs)
                          Rural industries       Rural MBB connectivity to consumers and businesses;
                                                 immersive, virtual experiences for tourism; IoT deployments
                                                 for environmental monitoring
                          Smart urban            The use cases within smart urban are diverse but might
                                                 include video surveillance (CCTV); large scale IoT and high
                                                 density sensor networks; construction; traffic management;
                                                 immersive, virtual experiences for tourism, leisure and retail;
                                                 large events (immersive experiences at stadiums)
                          Transport              Roadside small cell deployments for connected cars;
                                                 connected vehicles (V2X); offloading flight data at terminals
                                                 (e.g. Passenger data); ultra-low latency and reliable

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                          27
                                                                                              Realising the Benefits of 5G


                                                 connectivity for public transport signalling or radio systems;
                                                 real-time video for driverless transport vehicles (long-term)
                      Manufacturing, logistics   End-to-end integration of solutions; outdoor connectivity
                      and distribution           (where Wi-Fi or 4G may be unsuitable); machine mobility
                                                 (wireless factory floors); smart tracking; sensor networks and
                                                 datamining (e.g. geolocation, motion sensors,
                                                 measurements, predictive maintenance); supply-chain, asset
                                                 and capacity management; AR/VR for remote maintenance
                                                 and remote control; image processing for remote quality
                                                 control and product life cycle; automated guided vehicles;
                                                 automated machinery/robotics (e.g. semi-nomadic cranes,
                                                 automated process machinery)
                      Broadband into homes       eMBB connectivity (mobile or FWA); remote working; mobility
                      and offices                for users; UHD video; AR/VR
                      Retail and hospitality     The use cases within retail and hospitality are diverse and
                                                 might overlap with some of those identified above (e.g. in the
                                                 smart urban consumer group) – for example, mixed reality e-
                                                 commerce (e.g. shopping online at a fashion event); content
                                                 creation for advertising; augmented shopping experiences.


                     Source: Analysys Mason.


  Many potential     Many industrially-focused users (energy and utilities, manufacturing, transport)
users are at very    that have started looking at these 5G use cases, or have received funding for
  early stages of    5G trials, appear to be at very early stages of 5G adoption, with proof of
   adoption, with    concepts (PoC) still being developed or tested in lab environments before they
     deployment      are deployed in real world situations. These PoC can take some time to
   some way off      establish, and subsequent migration to full commercial deployment is also not
                     guaranteed.
   Enterprise and    Enterprise and industrial users (e.g. transport, manufacturing) and/or those
  industrial users   working within dedicated spaces (venues and stadiums, manufacturing floors)
       and those     might be key areas where 5G private networks may be favoured over public
   working within    networks. Mobile operators around the world are still adjusting to offering
       dedicated     differentiated enterprise and vertically-focused solutions using tailored 5G
     spaces may      connectivity, and will take time to implement the latest network functionalities
favour private 5G    offered by the most recent 3GPP (i.e. 5G standard) releases in their public
        networks     networks. Additionally, standardised or fully commercial vendor offerings are
                     still being established based on the latest 5G standards. As a result, short-
                     term demand from ‘early adopters’ in industrial or enterprise segments may be
                     addressed by private networks. Key features of private networks might
                     include: vertically-focused solutions; on-site data security and data processing;
                     network control; flexibility to tailor uplink and downlink capacity distinct for
                     dedicated spaces.
                     5G applications that might be delivered using dedicated private networks
                     include use cases where specific connectivity guarantees (e.g. in terms of
                     capacity, reliability or latency) might be needed: examples of use cases
                     included industrial use of AR/VR, industrial use of UHD video, autonomous
                     vehicles or machines (in a factory, campus or enterprise site); automated
                     guided vehicles, or AGVs (in a factory or port environment); mission-critical or
                     remote object and machine manipulation, robotics, sensor networks (in a
                     dedicated/defined space).

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                           28
                                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G


      Some 5G      5G applications that would be more suited to public networks include use
applications are   cases requiring wide-area coverage or wide-area mobility, e.g. high-speed
 more suited to    broadband (FWA home and office, consumer mobile connectivity on
public networks    handsets); connected vehicles (ambulances, buses, passenger vehicles on
                   roads); sensor networks (for smart cities, logistics and distribution, public
                   services consumer groups); smart tracking.

                   3.3      Consumer group benefits and beneficiaries
                   The users of 5G within each of the consumer groups identified in the previous
                   section are a mixture of individual consumers, households, businesses and
                   the public sector. Whether and how different users decide to invest in a 5G
                   product or solution will vary between business-to-consumer (B2C) and
                   business-to-business (B2B) 5G services. Given that 5G modems and
                   subscriber identity modules (SIMs) can be embedded into different types of
                   products (vehicles, machines and other types of equipment in the IoT), there is
                   also a business-to-business-to-consumer (B2B2C) category of 5G services.
                   These different modes of consumption of 5G services can be considered as
                   follows:
                   •     B2C: This refers to 5G connectivity consumed directly as a service, e.g.
                         individual consumption for 5G-based fixed wireless access (FWA) and
                         mobile broadband. Broadly speaking, B2C services are what previous
                         generations of mobile technology have focussed on. In the 4G era in
                         particular, the mobile industry has been successful in expanding the
                         market for B2C services via smartphones, including video streaming, e-
                         sports and a wide range of mobile-focussed applications (e.g. taxi booking
                         applications such as Uber, social media applications). The range of
                         potential B2C 5G services is vast, and 5G is likely to bring more immersive
                         consumer experiences such as immersive retail, media and entertainment,
                         as identified by the use cases and consumer groups discussed in the
                         previous section of this report.
                   •     B2B: This refers to 5G connectivity used within business and/or industrial
                         processes. 5G for businesses is poised to be where the most
                         transformative applications of 5G emerge, with consequential benefit
                         through cost savings and productivity enablement – for example a 5G-
                         connected machine or sensors in a production line that could either enable
                         products to be produced more quickly, or equipment downtime to be
                         avoided through predictive maintenance, for example.
                   •     B2B2C: This refers to 5G-enabled solutions and connectivity embedded
                         into end-consumer products – these embedded solutions might include
                         5G-connected vehicles, 5G-connected CCTV, 5G-enabled health
                         monitoring systems and so forth. For B2B2C 5G services, the user is likely
                         to purchase 5G connectivity as part of a solution being purchased from
                         another business. This B2B2C 5G service category might include 5G
                         buyers in the public sector, as well as firms and individuals.

                   A summary of the predominant mode of consumption for 5G in different
                   consumer groups and relevant sections is included in Table 3-5 below.




                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                              29
                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G


 Table 3-5: Predominant mode of consumption for 5G in different consumer groups

 Consumer group                 Sector                   B2B     B2C             B2B2C
 Media and Entertainment        Gaming                                           
                                Media                           
                                Venues and events               
 Public services                Health and social care                          
                                Education                                        
                                Public safety and                               
                                security
 Energy and utilities           Utilities                                       
                                Oil and gas                                     
                                Mining                   
                                Renewables                                      
 Rural industries               Agriculture                                     
                                Forestry                                        
                                Fishing                                         
                                Tourism                                        
 Smart urban                    Smart cities                    
                                Construction                                    
                                Professional services    
                                Tourism                         
 Transport                      Public transport                
                                Automotive                                      
                                Airports                        
                                Water transport                 
 Manufacturing, logistics and   Freight                                         
 distribution
                                Ports                                           
                                Smart factories                                 
 High-speed broadband into      Home broadband                   
 homes and offices              Office broadband         
 Retail and hospitality         e-commerce                      
                                Hospitality                     


Source: Analysys Mason


The main factors considered when deciding to invest in 5G can vary between
the different modes of consumption and the business case for 5G is
intrinsically linked to an individual use case. Analysys Mason’s Research
Division publishes connected consumer surveys for different world regions,
and for different types of telecommunications service – mobile, TV, video,
digital services, over the top (OTT) services etc. In a recent mobile survey, a
key finding was that respondents were primarily interested in the ability of 5G
to improve download speeds, video resolution and gaming performance. For
example, new 5G services that individual consumers expressed interest in
paying more for included AR/VR services such as virtual chatrooms,
immersive gaming and in-car entertainment. (Analysys Mason, Connected
Consumer 2020: 5G, data consumption and monetisation). For B2B and
B2B2C 5G services, interest in 5G is potentially also driven by the use cases
offered, albeit that these use case might be packaged differently to those
offered to individual consumers. Hence, it is likely to be the more innovative
services that showcase 5G in the B2B and B2B2C sectors, such as AR/VR.

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 30
                                                                         Realising the Benefits of 5G


Since these services will help to stimulate demand for high-performance
connectivity more generally, the speed and latency advantages of 5G will have
a key role to play.
Based on the literature we have reviewed for this study and the evidence
presented to us during the study, we have identified the following criteria that
different types of users and modes of consumption (B2C and B2B) might
consider when investing in 5G. The criteria for B2B2C investment in 5G
depends on whether utility of 5G is primarily accrued to individuals or
businesses and as such sits across the criterion outlined below. When
choosing a 5G solution, individuals and businesses will inevitably consider
how 5G compares with existing and/or alternative solutions available to
address the envisaged uses (e.g. 4G, fibre, Wi-Fi, etc.). These considerations
are reflected within the various criteria shown below such as price, coverage,
etc.


Table 3-6: Criteria for investing in 5G – individual consumers and households (B2C)

 Criteria          Description
 Price             • The cost of devices plus the monthly charge, but also including factors
                     such as price compared to existing solutions (e.g. 4G) data allowances,
                     the functionality of new devices, choice of mobile provider, customer
                     services offered etc.
 Coverage          • The total coverage or coverage in specific locations relevant to an
                     individual consumer (where I live, where I work, indoors etc.)
                   • How 5G compares to coverage from existing solutions (4G, Wi-Fi) in the
                     specific locations
 Data speeds       • The improvement in user experience and engagement that the 5G
                     service / device offers (compared to an existing solution, if relevant),
                     and/or better quality for services used currently via existing solutions
                     (e.g. quality of entertainment)
 New services      • This refers to new services that 5G might enable that are not available
                     via existing solutions (AR/VR, immersive content, e-sports, etc.)
                   • B2C consumers might also be attracted to 5G as an alternative way of
                     receiving a broadband connection, which might be considered a new
                     service for individual or households (e.g. 5G FWA instead of fibre or
                     fixed broadband)
                   • Supplier influence might also be a factor in new services (e.g. MNOs or
                     device manufacturers promoting new services using a 5G smartphone to
                     incentivise 4G users to upgrade handsets to a 5G-enabled device)
 Perception of     • This includes individuals being concerned about health risks from 5G as
 the technology      well as awareness of the technology and the benefits it brings


Source: Analysys Mason.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                           31
                                                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G


                      Table 3-7: Criteria for investing in 5G – businesses and the public sector (B2B)

                       Criteria        Description
                       Price           • Total cost of ownership, total deployment cost, opex and other equipment-
                                         related spend needed to enable the 5G use cases, over the lifetime of the
                                         equipment
                                       • Cost-benefit analysis (e.g. comparison of the cost of a 5G solution
                                         compared to existing ones, compared to the additional functionality/benefits
                                         provided)
                                       • Extent to which 5G supports specified improvements within the business
                                         (cost savings, productivity, reduced machinery downtime, additional data
                                         insights or visualisations etc.)
                                       • The contribution to the investment made by suppliers and the incentives
                                         offered (e.g. scope of contract offered, payment, models, service level
                                         agreements)
                       Supplier        • This refers to network provider choice/influence of mobile providers – some
                       push              B2B users who already use non-5G services from an MNO might be
                                         encouraged by the MNO to migrate to a 5G solution
                       Coverage        • The total coverage or coverage in specific locations relevant to the business
                                         (which might include coverage for an individual campus or factory, or for
                                         multiple locations across the UK, or across international locations)
                       Data            • The improvement in user experience that the 5G service / device offers,
                       speeds            which include better quality for services used as well as factors such as
                                         reliability, network availability
                       New             • Demonstration of the ability of 5G to deliver specific use cases that the
                       services          business needs, including adding mobility to use cases that the business
                                         already makes use of via a fixed network; for example, for health workers
                                         who have access to real-time video applications or other visual tools (e.g.
                                         precision geo-mapping) whilst indoors or in the office, 5G might enable
                                         access to the same tools whilst outdoors or on the move, in a way that
                                         could not have been delivered using 4G due to constraints of
                                         bandwidth/latency of connection
                       Risks and       • Associated risks of the 5G investment (which might be tested via a proof of
                       feasibility       concept ahead of full investment)
                                       • Practical implementation issues
                                       • Availability, catalogue and lead time on hardware/software to deploy 5G
                       Return on       • How costs can be recovered over the lifetime of the investment
                       investment
                       Security        • Assurance that the network security features offered by the proposed 5G
                                         installation meets business requirements


                      Source: Analysys Mason.




                      3.4         The benefits of 5G
           Several    Compared to previous mobile broadband standards, 5G is designed to enable
challenges mean       a wider range of use cases and applications; and thus, a potentially greater
      the existing    range of benefits.
     evidence on
benefits is limited
   and uncertain
                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                           32
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     While the identification and conceptualisation of these benefits is relatively
                     well evidenced (but evolving, as new use cases emerge), the quantification of
                     these benefits is limited and subject to uncertainty.
                     One key reason for this is that 5G is a relatively new technology that, as of
                     early 2021, is only just beginning to be rolled out in the UK and around the
                     world, and will evolve as further investment is made into services and
                     solutions. This means there are very few empirical data on the roll out,
                     adoption and application of 5G. In the absence of such data, it is difficult to
                     estimate the scale and nature of benefits associated with 5G.
          Existing   Existing studies have attempted to estimate the overall impact or benefit of
  estimates either   5G. However, faced with the same data limitations, these studies all provide
rely on subjective   ex ante estimates which either rely on assumptions about the nature and scale
  assessments of     of the adoption of 5G and the benefits it brings; or draw on the empirical
 the impact of 5G    evidence on the evolution and impact of previous technologies, such as 4G, to
 or assume 5G is     approximate or make assumptions about how 5G will be adopted and the
    comparable to    benefits it will bring.
         previous
                     Both approaches have limitations. Studies based on the impacts of previous
     technologies
                     technologies can use robust estimates of these impacts but are restricted by
                     the assumption that 5G is comparable to previous technologies. Studies which
                     forecast the impact of 5G based purely on expert assessment can assume
                     that the impact of 5G will be more transformative, but such forecasts are
                     highly subjective. The trade-off between the extent to which these studies are
                     grounded in empirical data and the extent to which they consider the specifics
                     of 5G reflects the limited evidence base.
       Non-linear    Another limitation of the evidence base is that many of the benefits apply a
 benefits are not    standardised (impact per user) approach. In reality, it is likely that the benefits
  well evidenced     of 5G may not grow linearly with the number of users. A general weakness of
                     the evidence base is that it does not provide very much insight into non-linear
                     benefits (e.g. critical mass effects, positive/negative feedback effects).
      Few, if any,   Finally, there are few studies which quantitatively bring together benefits in
studies provide a    social, economic and environmental spheres. For example, separate studies
  comprehensive      may address productivity gains in manufacturing and social gains in wellbeing
      assessment     of healthcare patients, but few papers found in the evidence review brought
       across the    together these diverse benefits in a comparable and commensurable way.
different types of
                     Issues specific to individual users groups are also identified for a number of
          benefits
                     cases. For example, where estimates based on stakeholder participation may
                     lack precision or be subject to optimism bias; where estimates based on case
                     studies or small pilot studies may not be a reliable indicator of the potential
                     benefits industry-wide. In other studies, the additionality of 5G for the benefits
                     of applications supported by multiple connectivity technologies is often not
                     identified and thus uncertain; or based on expert but subjective judgement.
                     There is also a tendency for existing studies to focus on the economic benefits
                     and overlook non-market social benefits or environmental benefits.
                     Nonetheless, below we summarise the broad types of benefits identified in the
                     literature and how these might be felt across the different consumer groups.
                     Broad types of benefits
                     Types of benefits identified in the literature can be summarised as follows and
                     are captured in the logic map in Figure 3-1:

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                33
                                                          Realising the Benefits of 5G


•   Economic benefits – The most often cited economic benefits of 5G use
    are increased productivity to firms and additional GDP growth (in many
    cases linked to increased productivity). Economic benefits are also often
    expressed in terms of cost reduction – for instance, when assessing the
    economic benefits of 5G use on costs to the healthcare sector. These
    economic benefits of 5G adoption are realised through a wide range of
    mechanisms, including: reductions in factory downtime; lower defect rates
    in manufacturing; energy efficiency gains; and reduced waste. Other
    economic benefits identified in the literature are linked to the enabling
    effects of 5G, including the creation of new business models and
    businesses, increased labour force participation and the launch of new
    products or services.
•   Social benefits – Social benefits associated with 5G use cases include
    increased life expectancy, improved public safety, better health, reduced
    loneliness, and overall improvements in self-assessed quality of life and
    life satisfaction metrics. Some social benefits arise from time savings
    linked to increased productivity in housekeeping and reduced travel times.
    Many studies note indirect social benefits as a result of improved
    economic and environmental conditions; however, these tend to be
    described qualitatively.
•   Environmental benefits – Many of the environmental benefits of 5G are
    linked to efficiency gains related to transport activities and the
    consumption of energy and natural resources. These benefits include
    reductions in traffic congestion and GHG emissions, reductions in the use
    of energy, and lower consumption of natural resources, such as water.
    Another key source of environmental benefits is linked to reduced demand
    for travel due to improved connectivity and an increase in remote working.
    Some environmental benefits are specific to particular consumer groups.
Benefits to Consumer Groups
•   Media and entertainment – 5G will enable multiple new products and
    experiences that could not be supported by older technologies, such as
    VR experiences, augmented reality, cloud gaming and new media. The
    economic benefits of these new products can be quantified based on the
    additional revenues that these products are expected to generate, which
    translates into additional output and GVA. Some studies also quantify the
    environmental benefits of reduced travel due to remote participation in
    events.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                            34
Figure 3-1 Logic map of 5G adoption and benefits
•   Public services – The benefits to healthcare stem from cost savings
    enabled by 5G technologies as a result of cheaper remote consultations
    and remote care, more efficient chronic healthcare provision and real-time
    monitoring of patients in clinical trials. The use of wearable health devices
    results in better health outcomes and lower healthcare costs. 5G-enabled
    technologies enable better provision of social care, which results in
    additional social benefits, such as reduced loneliness and improved quality
    of life. The benefits to the education sector include improved efficiency and
    better learning outcomes due to better collaborative tools and AR
    applications. 5G will also benefit public safety due to improved monitoring
    and security devices, resulting in saved lives, and reduced damage from
    burglary.
•   Energy and utilities – 5G is expected to bring substantial energy
    efficiency improvements due to its application to smart grids and smart
    meters within utility companies themselves (such as remote expert support
    for employees working in hazardous environments, 3G imaging of
    underground assets, real-time video links, etc.). These are often quantified
    in the literature as economic benefits (efficiency leading to energy cost
    savings) as well as environmental benefits (reduced GHG emissions).
    Similar technologies are also expected to reduce water use.
•   Rural industries – The benefits are particularly important to agriculture,
    where 5G will enable better monitoring of crops and livestock. The benefits
    include higher crop yields, lower healthcare costs for livestock and time
    savings. More efficient use of pesticides is also expected to generate
    some environmental benefits. Overall, rural economies are also expected
    to benefit from improved connectivity, which previous technologies could
    not provide cost-effectively. These benefits include reduced cost of high-
    speed connectivity and bringing households online, which is expected to
    generate additional economic benefits through increased use of e-
    commerce. There may also be social benefits associated with decreased
    isolation and loneliness. However, the main existing evidence that
    addresses social impacts of 5G on loneliness (notably the Liverpool 5G
    Testbed) analyses 5G in an urban setting.
•   Smart urban – Deployment of 5G-enhanced traffic management systems
    (as one example of many smart urban use cases) is expected to reduce
    congestion, generating economic and environmental benefits, such as
    shorter travel times and lower GHG emissions. The use of drones for
    inspection of urban areas will result in efficiency savings, reducing labour
    time.
•   Transport – In road transport, 5G will enable technologies such as
    connected and autonomous vehicles. These technologies will result in
    economic benefits due to more efficient utilisation of vehicles and reduced
    congestion. These directly translate into further environmental effects.
    Improvements in vehicle connectivity will enable better telematics used for
    remote diagnostics and additional experiences for passengers. These are
    valued in terms of monetary benefits per vehicle utilising these
    technologies. Water transport benefits will be driven by efficiency gains at
    ports, stemming from automation of operations and lower congestion.
•   Manufacturing, logistics and distribution – 5G technologies will boost
    productivity at smart factories, with technologies such as AR remote
    support, digital tracking and advanced predictive maintenance expected to
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


                          reduce repair costs and downtime. AI cameras, environment monitoring
                          within the factory and AR-powered warehouse operations will result in
                          improved quality management. This will reduce out of spec production,
                          resulting in greater output, and lower GHG emissions and waste. Nascent
                          delivery drone logistics are expected to take over last mile delivery,
                          resulting in faster delivery and cost savings.
                    •     Retail and hospitality – 5G use cases in the retail sector will enable
                          warehouse and supply optimisation, resulting in increased productivity.
                          New AR shopping experiences will enable additional revenue, increasing
                          the retail sector’s output. Also, AR applications will enable new
                          experiences to visitors, which will contribute to the tourism sector’s output.
                    •     Broadband/super-fast connectivity – super-fast wireless connectivity will
                          enable widespread use of cloud computing. Cloud computing gives access
                          to superior resources on demand, resulting in increased productivity, and
                          in turn, in GDP growth. Cloud computing is also more energy efficient,
                          leading to additional environmental benefits in the form of lower GHG
                          emissions. 5G is also expected to provide super-fast connectivity to areas
                          not benefitting from comparable wired connections. Improved connectivity
                          will enable additional economic activity in these areas, resulting in GDP
                          growth and an increased labour participation rate.

                    3.5      Estimates of the magnitude of the benefits
In many studies     A substantial strand of literature takes a high-level approach to estimating the
the benefits are    economic benefits of 5G. Due to the variety of use cases across multiple
 quantified at an   consumer groups, 5G is treated as a general-purpose technology (GPT) and
      aggregate     the benefits are quantified at an aggregate economy-wide level. Studies taking
  economy-wide      this approach tend to draw on historical evidence by assuming that the
            level   impacts of 5G will be similar to the impacts of previous revolutionising
                    technologies on productivity growth or GDP growth
                    Other studies (Accenture 2018) (Oxera 2019) look at the past relationship
                    between connectivity speed and macroeconomic performance indicators, such
                    as GDP growth and business creation rate. By assuming that these
                    relationships will hold in the future, these studies estimate the contributions of
                    5G-enabled super-fast connectivity to future GDP growth or growth in the
                    number of business establishments and employment.
                    Top-down estimates of economy-wide benefits
                    The estimates of the economy-wide benefits of 5G by the Australian
                    Government (2018) assume that the productivity growth impacts will be similar
                    to those attributed to other general-purpose technologies in the past, such as
                    steam technology, mobile phones, or ICT. The study utilises various
                    assumptions based on these findings and the projections of 5G adoption,
                    which results in 18 scenario variants. Depending on the scenario, it is
                    estimated that 5G adoption in Australia will increase the productivity growth
                    rates by between 0.05% and 0.23%. These increases could occur over 10
                    years in some scenarios, while other scenarios assume that the effects will
                    continue for 30 years (assuming that 5G is a more transformative technology).
                    A similar approach has been taken in GSMA (2018) which assumes that the
                    maximum annual GDP growth rate enabled by 5G could reach 0.28%

                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 37
                                                             Realising the Benefits of 5G


worldwide. This value is informed by studies evaluating the past contribution of
broadband and mobile telecommunications to global economic growth. To
obtain GDP contributions by industry, 5G-enabled growth was distributed
across industries based on an assessment on how 5G use cases are relevant
to each industry.
Barclays (2019) estimates that the 5G roll-out in the UK will result in additional
output of between £8.3bn to £15.7bn in 2025, depending on the roll-out
scenario. Correspondingly, the impacts by 2030 could range between £51.9bn
and £89.6bn of additional output. These findings rely on modelling using the
evidence accumulated through desk research and business survey results.
Accenture (2018) estimates the benefits of 5G based on the impact of
previous generations of wireless connectivity in Canada. It finds that a 10%
increase in mobile network users from one quarter to the next generates, on
average, a 0.6% increase in GDP. The study extrapolates this result to obtain
the potential contribution of 5G to Canada’s GDP in the future.
Other studies rely on the estimated impacts of wired broadband. Oxera (2019)
estimates the combined impacts of super-fast fibre and 5G deployment. It
predicts an impact on productivity at between 0.3% and 3.8% as a result of
super-fast connectivity, basing this on findings on the impact of wired
broadband from IPSOS Mori (2018) and Ericsson, Arthur D. Little and
Chalmers University of Technology (2013). Additional impacts estimated by
Oxera (2019) include increase in the number of businesses operating in the
area benefitting from superfast connectivity, at between 0.4% and 3.2%, also
based on findings from other studies (Ericsson, Arthur D. Little and Chalmers
University of Technology 2013) (Hasbi 2017).
Some relevant findings are available on the economy-wide applications of
technologies related to 5G. CEBR (2016) estimates the value of big data and
IoT to the UK economy. The expected benefits of IoT in the UK over 2015-20
are valued at 0.7% of annual GDP. In other words, a 1% increase in IoT
adoption results approximately in a 0.02% increase in GDP. A study by AT
Kearney (2016) estimates that IoT could increase GDP growth by 7
percentage points through productivity growth and value redistributed to end
consumers in the EU. Approximately 30% of that impact is attributed to energy
savings and increased product durability, 20% is attributed to freed up time,
42% is due to productivity gains and 8% is the value of the IoT devices market
revenues.
Similarly, Deloitte (2019) estimates the potential impacts of 5G in Scotland as
a result of economy-wide cloud computing applications. The study borrows
from a previous study for the European Commission, which estimated that in
the EU for every 1% increase in cloud computing adoption, there is an
approximate 0.04% increase in GDP. The same Deloitte (2019) study relies on
CEBR (2016) study on UK SMEs, finding that cloud computing adoption
results in 0.02% increase in productivity per 1% increase in cloud computing
adoption. Additionally, the evidence from CEBR (2016) suggests that data
analytics and IoT will lead to creation of new businesses (3% and 5%
respectively).




Cambridge Econometrics                                                               38
                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


However, given that IoT and big data applications can be supported by
communications technologies other that 5G, it is unclear how much of these
benefits should be attributed to 5G-enabled capabilities.
5G as a ‘general purpose technology’
An important and recurring finding of evidence analysed in this study was that
the role of 5G in future economic activity is highly uncertain. Studies (or
scenarios within studies) therefore need to take a stance on whether 5G will
have transformative and pervasive impacts on future economic activities or will
instead result in modest improvement to performance in limited sectors of the
economy. The former stance sometimes categorises 5G as a ‘general purpose
technology’ (GPT) – a technology which is characterised by “pervasiveness,
inherent potential for technical improvements and innovational
complementarities” (Bresnahan and and Trajtenberg 1995). Typical examples
of GPTs include steam power, electricity and ICT.
As a part of this study, estimates of the economic impacts of previous
technologies were collated and compared, including both GPTs (e.g.
electricity, steam etc) and technologies more comparable to 5G (4G/3G). This
was then critically evaluated to inform scenarios in the economic model (see
Section 7.1). The full list of economic impact estimates – expressed as a
percentage point uplift in growth and standardised where possible – is shown
in Figure 3-2:
Figure 3-2: Economic growth uplift across the full list of estimates from collated studies
(GPT & 5G-related technologies)




Sources: Cambridge Econometrics analysis; (Qiang, Rossotto and Kimura 2009); (Edquist,
        Goodridge and Haskel 2021); (AT Kearney 2016)…
Cambridge Econometrics                                                                     39
                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G



These results were further critically assessed by:
•   condensing multiple estimates from the same study but across different
    years;
•   condensing multiple estimates where a high/low estimate is provided
    (unless the difference between high & low estimates explicitly corresponds
    to GPT vs non-GPT scenarios); and
•   categorising studies into groups (GPT or ‘incremental’ improvement / non-
    GPT technologies).
Some papers were also removed from the shortlist due to extreme results
and/or the studies’ ability to attribute causality (e.g. Qiang, Rossotto and
Kimura (2009)). The result of this critical analysis is shown in Figure 3-3.
The study finds that general purpose technologies tend to report a higher
impact than ‘incremental’ technologies. The median impact estimate of the
former was 0.35pp, while the median impact of the latter was 0.7pp.


Figure 3-3: Economic growth uplift across a shortlist list of estimates from collated
studies (GPT & 5G-related technologies)




This exercise is however indicative and is highly sensitive to the way in which
the shortlist of papers are selected and organised. Moreover, comparing
across papers in this way presents additional challenges of consistency
because the various studies adopt different assumptions, consider different
eras and report impacts on different economic variables (e.g. GVA vs multi-
factor productivity).
Economic benefits across consumer groups
The evidence analysed in this study suggests that 5G benefits to the
manufacturing sector – stemming from higher productivity and lower waste –
are likely to be large in magnitude. Benefits estimated vary from a 4%

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                     40
                                                                                 Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    increase in GDP (by 2030) (STL Partners and Huawei 2019), to a 5.4%
                    increase in annual revenues (by 2035) (IHS Markit 2019), and a £2.6bn
                    increase in revenues of the manufacturing sector in the UK (by 2026) (W5G
                    2020).
                    Productivity benefits are expected to generate large cost savings to the UK
                    logistics sector (£2.8bn by 2030) and correspond to increases in the UK
                    sector’s GDP (£1.2bn by 2030). Evidence from case studies suggests that this
                    will be boosted further by automation in ports.
                    Media and entertainment markets are expected to benefit from 5G
                    (predominantly via VR/AR applications). Estimates in the literature suggest
                    that this could increase the size of the media and entertainment sector by 4%
                    by 2030.
                    Cost savings are expected for public services (principally health and social
                    care), as a result of healthier lifestyles, remote provisioning and remote
                    monitoring (e.g. medication monitoring). One study estimates that this will
                    boost EU28 healthcare sector’s annual GDP by €235bn by 2025. Evidence
                    from the Liverpool 5G testbed indicates that cost savings will be in the region
                    of £2,500 per user per year. It is anticipated that the energy and utilities sector
                    too will experience a number of operational benefits, with an estimated annual
                    impact on the sector’s GDP contribution at 4.7% by 2030 according to one
                    study.
                    5G is expected to aid the Rural economy by boosting crop yields of arable
                    land and enabling better monitoring of livestock health in agriculture; and by
                    assisting with tourism (evidenced by an example application in the Pennines)
                    in rural areas.
                    Environmental benefits
                    Evidence of environmental benefits are also present in the literature,
                    predominantly relating to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions savings as a
                    result of 5G-enabled applications in energy and utilities (up to 6.4MTCO2 per
                    year) (O2 2018), reduced traffic and congestion (up to 370,000 tonnes of CO2
                    emissions per year in Scotland alone) (Deloitte 2019), GHG savings in
                    logistics (in a case study of a pilot deployment in a port, the result was a 8.2%
                    reduction in the port’s emissions) (Ericsson 2020), reduced waste in
                    manufacturing (Ericsson 2019) and general 5G efficiency gains compared to
                    previous generations.
                    Social benefits
 Wellbeing and      For certain use-cases – most notably in Health and Social Care applications –
life satisfaction   there is evidence of improvements to the users’ perceived sense of wellbeing.
                    Liverpool 5G Health and Social Care Testbed (2019) identified the following
                    social impacts:
                    •   Life satisfaction impacts – VR simulations (quizzing and gaming apps)
                        were found to increase reported life satisfaction by 1.4 points (out of 10).
                        Safehouse technologies (used to monitor the environments of vulnerable
                        individuals) were found to increase reported life satisfaction by 0.7 points
                        (out of 10).
                    •   Loneliness / isolation impacts – VR simulations (quizzing and gaming
                        apps) were found to lead to: a 28% decrease in those who said that they
                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                               41
                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


    often felt that they lack companionship; a 20% decrease in those who said
    that they often felt left out; and a 13% increase in those who said that they
    hardly ever felt isolated from others. Push-to-talk services (5G-supported
    hardware to enable individuals from vulnerable groups to connect and talk)
    were found to lead to: a 25% increase in those who said that they hardly
    ever felt that they lack companionship: a 75% increase in those that said
    they hardly ever felt left out; and a 50% increase in those who said they
    hardly ever felt isolated from others.
Confidence and independence – Medication support services were found to
   lead to: a 73% increase in those confident and happy to take medication; a
   53% increase in those who felt safe; and a 40% increase in service users
   who felt more independent.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                              42
                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G



                      4        5G marketplace and readiness in the UK

                      While the focus of this study is on understanding the drivers and benefits of
                      5G adoption, and the impact of barriers to adoption on the realisation of
                      benefits, it is still helpful to step back and take stock of the state of play in the
                      UK 5G market. This helps to understand the current state of development of
                      the UK 5G market and how that is likely to change in future. This chapter
                      provides an overview of the current UK 5G marketplace with regard to recent
                      developments in the evolution of the 5G market, spectrum deployment,
                      network architecture, and standards; including the readiness of the UK for 5G
                      deployment and adoption.

                      4.1      Recent developments
      MNOs first      Mobile network operators (MNOs) in the UK commenced their launch of 5G
   deployed 5G        services in selected locations in 2019. These initial 5G services have
services in 2019      predominantly targeted individual consumers of mobile broadband (MBB)
                      services. For these users, 5G radio means greater capacity for the services
                      they already use on smartphones and other mobile devices. 5G MBB
                      therefore offers faster mobile data connections for video downloads, live
                      streaming and gaming, offering a step change in quality of experience for
                      these services compared to slower, 4G-based MBB.
5G networks are       The UK’s 5G networks are being progressively expanded by MNOs to address
being expanded        a larger coverage footprint and in so doing, to address a wider market. This
    to address a      wider market is expected to include a diverse range of 5G users and uses,
diverse range of      including business and enterprise customers, industrial companies, creative
 users and uses       industries, media, aviation and transport sector, utilities and many more.
Roll out is largely   From published data on UK 5G network coverage it appears operators are
  on the basis of     following a largely population-led MBB capacity-driven approach to initial 5G
       population     roll-out, targeting locations with highest density of individual MBB consumers,
           density    equivalent to locations with the highest population density.
  5G coverage in      Using data available from the GSMA (GSMA 2021), we can estimate that the
 the UK is above      5G coverage in the UK was c.30% of the population as of Q4 2020, placing it
   the European       slightly above average for European countries where 5G services have been
         average      launched (see Figure 4-1). Most of the coverage upon which the estimates
                      above are based are using 3.5GHz spectrum. However, in markets in Europe
                      where 3.5GHz spectrum is not yet available, there is 5G coverage being
                      provided using existing mobile bands, such as 2.1GHz, using technology
                      solutions to enable 4G/5G traffic sharing within the operators licensed
                      spectrum. Since this data was published, we note that Vodafone has
                      implemented this sharing solution in its 2.1GHz spectrum, to expand its ‘5G’
                      coverage in the UK.




                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                  43
                                                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


                                                Figure 4-1: 5G coverage in the UK and European countries, Q4 2020

                                                 100%                                                                         100%
                                                  90%                                                                         90%




                                                                                                                                      Share of population across geotypes
                                                  80%                                                                         80%

                       5G Population coverage     70%                                                                         70%
                                                  60%                                                                         60%
                                                  50%                                                                         50%
                                                  40%                                                                         40%
                                                  30%                                                                         30%
                                                  20%                                                                         20%
                                                  10%                                                                         10%
                                                    0%                                                                        0%
                                                         Netherlands




                                                               Greece
                                                             Belgium




                                                                    UK
                                                               Austria




                                                               France




                                                               Cyprus
                                                               Ireland




                                                         Luxembourg
                                                              Norway
                                                           EU27 + UK
                                                               Croatia
                                                          Switzerland




                                                                  Italy
                                                            Romania


                                                              Sweden

                                                              Estonia


                                                                 Latvia
                                                              Finland




                                                             Bulgaria

                                                             Slovakia
                                                                 Malta
                                                             Slovenia

                                                             Portugal
                                                            Denmark




                                                            Lithuania
                                                            Germany




                                                                 Spain


                                                               Poland
                                                             Hungary
                                                             Czechia




                                                         Rural      Towns and suburbs          Cities      5G population coverage

                                                Notes: 5G population coverage in European countries (black diamond), overlaid onto the
                                                        share of the population across three geotypes: cities, towns and suburbs, and
                                                        rural. The chart does not indicate the split of 5G coverage across these geotypes.

                                                Source: (GSMAi 2021), (Eurostat 2021), Analysys Mason.




        To date,      Like other 5G early-adopter countries, the UK’s 5G infrastructure deployed by
  deployment of       MNOs to date has been based on adding 5G radio to existing 4G
5G by MNOs has        infrastructure (a deployment referred to as ‘non-standalone’). This approach
      been ‘non-      was adopted in recognition of factors including device availability, network
     standalone’      equipment limitations, cost, and the need for rapid early deployment.
                The   In its 5G strategy published in 2017 6, the UK Government set out a clear
     government’s     ambition for the UK to be a global leader in 5G. To this end, the Government
     test beds and    is investing in a nationally coordinated programme of 5G testing, which is the
trials programme      5G Testbeds and Trials programme being coordinated by DCMS. The
  is being used to    Testbeds and Trials programme has at its core key goals to accelerate the
    accelerate the    availability of 5G infrastructure, and the use of 5G, thereby creating
   roll out and use   opportunities for UK businesses and drive productivity and efficiency benefits
              of 5G   for the UK economy through 5G deployment and use.
                      The Testbeds and Trials programme is testing 5G deployment via multiple
                      local deployments, typically based on stand-alone 5G radio and/or core
                      network infrastructure separate from wider commercial 4G/5G
                      implementations.



                      6
                           A 5G strategy for the UK, 2017 and Next Generation Mobile Technologies: An update to the 5G strategy
                      for the UK, December 2017

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                                                44
                                                                                                    Realising the Benefits of 5G


                   Several MNOs have also commenced 5G pilot projects (including projects
                   funded via DCMS’s Testbeds and Trials and the associated urban connected
                   communities/rural communities projects, as well as their own test facilities).
                   These various 5G pilots and test networks are aimed at widening the 5G
                   market to diversify use cases and to deliver connectivity to different consumer
                   groups, including industrial sites, enterprise services and automotive. Findings
                   from these testbeds and trials are discussed in standalone Appendix A.

                   4.2         Spectrum used in UK MNO 5G deployments
Spectrum for 5G    The characteristics of 5G new radio are such that full capabilities of 5G
rollout has been   technology are delivered when the technology is deployed in wider contiguous
harmonised at a    blocks (because there is a trade-off between available bandwidth, and
 European level    reliability/latency performance of 5G radio, since different transmission paths
                   can be shaped for different services 7). In European markets, spectrum for 5G
                   is being made available in the three 5G pioneer spectrum bands that have
                   been harmonised for 5G use across Europe; the European harmonised bands
                   for 5G are referred to as the 700MHz band (703-788MHz), the 3.5GHz band
                   (3.4-3.8GHz) and the 26GHz band (24.25-27.5GHz).
                   Initial 5G network launch in the UK took place using spectrum in the 3.5GHz
                   band (from 3.4-3.6GHz), which was auctioned to MNOs in 2018. Additional
                   spectrum suitable for 5G use was auctioned by Ofcom in 2021. Final results of
                   Ofcom’s spectrum auction for the upper part of the 3.5GHz band (3.6-
                   3.8GHz), together with the 700MHz band were published in April 2021 8.
                   Assignments from the auction have subsequently been updated through a
                   trade of spectrum between Vodafone and Telefonica, with details confirmed by
                   Ofcom in July 2021 9. The trade of spectrum will require the respective
                   operators to carry out site upgrades and to share use of the two blocks until
                   end of 2025. Thereafter, the assignments of spectrum between UK MNOs in
                   the band between 3.4-3.8GHz (correct at the time of publishing this report) is
                   as shown in Figure 4-2 below.
                   The spectrum as shown below is available to individual MNOs on a nationwide
                   basis. All four MNOs have launched 5G services in their nationwide networks
                   in selected (mainly urban) UK locations using this spectrum, together with
                   other spectrum bands available to MNOs.




                   7
                       Ofcom considered the bandwidth needed for 5G services as part of its consultation on award of the
                   700MHz and 3.6GHz spectrum, here
                   https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0023/195521/consultation-sut-modelling-700mhz-3.6-
                   3.8ghz-spectrum.pdf. Ofcom concluded that it is technically feasible for mobile network operators to support
                   ‘a wide range of 5G services’ with a spectrum bandwidth of less than 80MHz, but with user experience (data
                   rates, reliability and latency) depending on the loading of the network.
                   8
                       Ofcom spectrum auction: final results announced - Ofcom
                   9
                       Mobile and wireless broadband - Ofcom

                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                   45
                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G


In March 2021, Ofcom concluded the first stage of its 3.6-3.8GHz and 700MHz
spectrum auction, confirming the amounts of spectrum awarded to each MNO.

  Figure 4-2: UK 3.4-3.6GHz spectrum band plan, including March 2021 award (MHz)




  Source: Ofcom, Analysys Mason.



In some other European markets, MNOs also have access to spectrum in the
26GHz band for 5G use. In the UK, the lower part of the 26GHz band is
reserved for private and shared access and is currently available on a shared
access basis, restricted to indoor use. Ofcom has not yet published a licensing
framework for 5G outdoor use of the 26GHz band.
The current state of 5G spectrum assignments, including recent awards of
700MHz and 3.6-3.8GHz bands are presented in Figure 4-3, although the
order of recent assignments is still to be determined.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 46
                                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G




                          Figure 4-3: Map of 5G pioneer spectrum bands in the UK following March 2021
                          spectrum awards (MHz)




                          Source: Ofcom, Analysys Mason.



                     4.3         Spectrum for private 5G deployment
     MNOs’ slow      Private 5G deployments are an alternative to using a public mobile network for
 implementation      5G service delivery, suitable especially for businesses or industrial customers
     of the latest   who may wish to tailor coverage, capacity and/or services to their specific
   functionalities   needs. These private 5G deployments might be used by several of the 5G
      into public    consumer groups discussed in this report. There are multiple reasons why
 networks might      some industrial users or businesses might choose to deploy their own 5G
        stimulate    infrastructure rather than using a public mobile network, but a key reason
     demand for      would be to ensure that the 5G technology capabilities that specific companies
      private 5G     need are provided in the timescales those companies require. One reason for
        networks     this is that these bespoke 5G capabilities might not be available in public
                     mobile networks, as MNOs are unlikely to implement the most recent 5G
                     functionalities into public networks at scale until there is sufficient market
                     demand to do so.
Ofcom has taken      If bespoke functionality of 5G is unavailable from public mobile networks
 steps to support    deployed by MNOs, or if users prefer to make use of a dedicated, on-site
  the deployment     network for their own business use, there is emerging evidence – such as
     of private 5G   from published articles and reports of trials 10 - of interest in deployment of
     networks via    private 5G networks to fill this gap. 5G private networks are now emerging in
   shared access     the UK and several other markets, tailored to delivering the specific use cases
         spectrum    and functionalities required by specific enterprises and industries. These
                     private networks might be used by firms whose central business is not

                     10
                          For example, https://www.lightreading.com/5g/vodafone-partners-with-ford-to-deploy-private-5g-network-
                     in-uk/d/d-id/761965

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                   47
                                                                                                          Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    telecommunications, such as certain small and medium-sized enterprises
                    (SMEs) in the industrial sector. These firms might have a need for tailored 5G
                    coverage and/or capacity to meet specific business needs. Recognising that
                    some enterprise or industrial users of 5G might wish to deploy their private
                    networks in the shorter term, Ofcom has taken proactive steps in the UK to
                    encourage private 5G deployment by making spectrum available via a local
                    licensed, shared access, framework. Shared access licences are technology
                    neutral and can be used for local 5G network deployment. These private
                    networks can be deployed either by MNOs, or by third-parties.
Spectrum in two     For private 5G networks, Ofcom has made available spectrum in two bands
bands has been      supported by 3GPP specifications for 5G devices – firstly the lower 2.25GHz
 made available     of the 26GHz band has been reserved for private and shared access for
on a local basis    indoor use across the UK, available for 5G use 11, and secondly the 3.8-
suited to private   4.2GHz band (a total of 400MHz) is available on a shared use nationally,
         5G use     where other existing users have not deployed 12. The availability of the 3.8-
                    4.2GHz band (adjacent to spectrum used by the public 5G networks, and
                    supported by 3GPP equipment) on a shared use basis is intended to enable
                    deployment of 5G infrastructure for prospective enterprise or industrial users 13.
                    The 3.8-4.2GHz band is part of the 3GPP ‘n77’ band (which spans 3.3-
                    4.2GHz) and hence devices supporting band n77 will be compatible with use
                    in the 3.8-4.2GHz band. Industrial users themselves, or their network delivery
                    partners (including MNOs) can apply to use Ofcom’s 3.8-4.2GHz spectrum for
                    deployment of dedicated networks and for MNOs, this might offer an easier
                    route to provide early industrial 5G services, until the public 5G networks have
                    capabilities for network slicing and quality of service (QoS) tailoring. It is noted
                    the spectrum assigned to MNOs in other 4G/5G frequency bands can also be
                    used for local deployments. Ofcom publishes details of the local licences it has
                    issued 14.




                    11
                         Ofcom manages and facilitates access to this spectrum on a per-location, ‘first-come, first-served’ basis,
                    allowing users to apply for a licence for as many indoor base and terminal stations needed to cover a
                    circular area with a maximum 50-metre radius. “By enabling access to the lower 26 GHz band, we are
                    adding to the spectrum options that would enable deployment of new 5G indoor applications, for example
                    for industrial users, with little to no impact on existing services and without prejudicing any future use of the
                    band outdoors.”
                    12
                         The 3.8-4.2GHz band is part of a spectrum band allocated for fixed satellite service (FSS) use
                    internationally, and was also used for fixed links in the UK. The limited deployments by existing incumbent
                    satellite and fixed users in the UK means that shared access is feasible, and available across most of the
                    country.
                    13
                         The spectrum is available across the country, though there are exclusion zones in certain areas for
                    satellite earth stations. There are two types of licence – a lower power licence (potential uses: industrial and
                    enterprise private networks and/or indoor mobile coverage extensions) and a medium power licence
                    (potential uses: industrial users with distributed sites, like ports, railyards, or large factories, and rural FWA).
                    Applications are currently open; Ofcom will assign local licences to people for coordinated access to this
                    band on a “per location, first come, first served” basis. Fees are payable, and if mobile terminals are
                    deployed licensees must keep an accurate record of the address they are limited to operate within.
                    14
                         Local Access licences (ofcom.org.uk)


                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                          48
                                                                                                         Realising the Benefits of 5G


Ofcom is making        Ofcom has also introduced an approach whereby local users can apply to
it easier for local    access spectrum that is already licensed to MNOs but not being used or
 users to access       planned for use within the next three years in a particular area 15 (Ofcom
 spectrum that is      2019). Again, this is aimed at accelerating local infrastructure deployment and
   not being used      deployment of private 5G networks where MNOs are not using the spectrum
                       to provide services within their public networks.
    Several other      In Germany, the Federal Network Agency, Bundesnetzagentur (BNetzA) has
        European       reserved spectrum available for private 5G deployment in the 3.7–3.8GHz
  regulators have      band. In March 2019, BNetzA published a framework for local 5G applications
 also taken steps      in this band; applications were opened in November 2019. The private
to enable private      spectrum licences are awarded on a local basis and used for “innovative 5G
  5G deployment        local solutions” in the industrial or small business sectors. Subsequently, in
                       January 2020, BNetzA published the process for making the 26GHz band
                       available for 5G use in Germany. In Germany, spectrum from 24.25-27.5GHz
                       is being made available on a ‘first-come, first-served’ licensed basis intended
                       for localised usage. Spectrum is being licensed in multiples of 50MHz blocks,
                       and can be used for any form of 5G connectivity including to provide wireless
                       broadband (fixed wireless access), mobile broadband, and industrial / IoT
                       connectivity (Bundesnetzagentur 2021). The regulator in Finland has also
                       reserved spectrum in the 26GHz band for industrial 5G use.
In France, MNOs        In France, the four nationwide MNOs agreed to make optional commitments to
     must provide      accelerate infrastructure roll-out, in exchange for 50MHz blocks of 3.4GHz
      customised       spectrum in the 2019 auction. One of these commitments was to commit to
      solutions to     “granting reasonable requests from economic actors (business, local
  enterprises and      authorities, administrations…) by providing them with customised solutions in
    businesses or      terms of coverage and performance or, if the operator prefers, by assigning its
      assign their     frequencies locally”. Additionally, applications for frequencies in the 2570-2620
      frequencies      MHz band were opened to metropolitan businesses by the regulator ARCEP
        locally to a   in May 2019 (ARCEP 2021). Applicants are granted spectrum through an
provider who can       online portal which has been open for applications since May 2019 (European
                       5G Observatory 2020).
       In the UK, a    Speed of the licence application process is likely to be important to ensure that
faster application     private 5G networks can meet immediate industrial needs. We understand that
 process for a 5G      Ofcom may look to explore the options of an online application process to
  private network      speed up the application process for shared access licences in the 3.8-
    licence would      4.2GHz band.
               help




                       15
                            Provided Ofcom and the incumbent licensee agree that the new user is unlikely to interfere with the
                       incumbent’s network or constrain their future plans, Ofcom will issue a short term (default of three years)
                       local access licence.


                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                        49
                                                                                                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     A June 2021 publication from the European Commission’s Radio Spectrum
                     Policy Group (RSPG) recommends that European regulators consider use of
         Greater
                     the 3.8-4.2GHz band for ‘local vertical applications’, which will potentially
  harmonisation
                     improve the supply market for equipment in this band if more European
  across Europe
                     regulators pursue this option 16. In June 2021, the Norwegian regulator Nkom
    on spectrum
                     proposed to open up the 3.8-4.2GHz band for local 5G networks, which will
bands for private
                     align with the spectrum already available in the UK. However, in markets such
  networks may
                     as France and Germany, different bands are already being used for local 5G
     improve the
                     deployment (2.6GHz in France, and 3.7GHz in Germany). The lack of a fully
   economics of
                     harmonised private network solution is likely to have cost implications on 5G
 private network
                     devices (e.g. modems, transmitters, sensors) and new proofs of concept. This
     deployment
                     consideration would apply particularly to industrial use cases and firms
                     operating in different European geographies where tailored devices would be
                     required to support different spectrum bands.

                     4.4                    Network architecture
5G networks can      Industry reports such as the Global Mobile Trends report from GSMA
 be delivered on     Intelligence (2021) highlight the enterprise opportunity for 5G, for which there
 standalone and      are several deployment options. There are two main 5G architectures – non-
 non-standalone      standalone, and standalone – with several options in terms of how each of
    architectures    these can be deployed.
      Standalone     As indicated by the GSMA Intelligence report, the enterprise/business
    networks are     opportunity is predicated on the availability of 5G standalone (SA) networks,
    important for    which are able to offer lower-latency capabilities than earlier technologies or
     realising the   5G when delivered via non-standalone infrastructure. This is because
       enterprise    standalone (SA) architecture is expected to unlock the more advanced
      opportunity    technical functionalities of 5G, such as the ability to tailor quality of service
                     through customised, end-to-end virtual network slices meeting different user
                     requirements such as low-latency, ultra-reliable use cases (see Figure 4-4).


                      Figure 4-4: Mobile traffic and usage evolution with 5G SA architectures

                                                4G/LTE and LTE-A                                     Initial 5G                                        Full 5G
                           Devices




                                                                                           Similar devices to those used                       Collaborative robots,
                                              User-friendly smartphones
                                                                                               in 4G/LTE and LTE-A                           automated machinery etc.


                                               Email           Apps                          Email            Apps                             Email             Apps
                           Types of usage




                                                Web           Video                          Web              Video                            Web            Video
                                                                                                                                             browsing
                                                                                                                           Data intensity




                                              browsing                                     browsing                                                         streaming
                                                                          Data intensity




                                                            streaming                                       streaming
                                               VoIP             TV                           VoIP                 TV                           VoIP               TV

                                               Cloud         Automa-                         Cloud          Automa-                            Cloud         Automa-
                                              robotics         tion                         robotics          tion                            robotics         tion
                                             Real-time                                     Real-time                                         Real-time
                                                              AR/VR                                          AR/VR                                               AR/VR
                                               video                                         video                                             video

                                                 limited support                           partially supported                              fully supported
                          Source: Analysys Mason.


                     16
                          RSPG21-024final_RSPG_Opinion_Additional_Spectrum_Needs.pdf (rspg-spectrum.eu)

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                         Realising the Benefits of 5G




      Standalone        From an infrastructure perspective, the evolution from a non-standalone (NSA)
networks operate        5G services to 5G SA involves migrating 5G networks to use 5G radio and
 independently of       core networks operated independently of 4G. The prospect of 5G core
   4G and enable        networks being cloud-native also helps with enabling enterprise or industrial
operators to offer      users to deploy their own 5G private networks, as well as improving the
   more bespoke         flexibility in public networks to offer differentiated services to business or
        solutions       industrial users.
  Several options       5G SA enterprise networks might be delivered using public mobile networks
     exist for the      and using the spectrum licensed to individual MNOs. Alternatively, private 5G
   deployment of        deployment might present a better opportunity for some enterprise or industrial
      standalone        users, utilising the 5G local licences in the 3.8-4.2GHz, and/or in the 26GHz
       enterprise       band (indoor use only), as described in the previous section.
        networks
                        Due to the increasing implementation of software-defined network
                        architectures both 5G infrastructures and devices could be developed to
                        include incremental features as and when the demand arises. Developments
 The majority of a      by many leading vendors suggest the majority of a network will be software-
  network may be        driven and as such new functionalities should only require a software upgrade
  software-driven       (if the demand and business case are evident for MNOs and vendors).
but migrating and       However, in the short term as virtualised solutions are starting to emerge, the
        integrating     complexity of migrating, and integrating, solutions is a key issue. It is noted
 solutions will still   DCMS is funding the SmartRAN Open Network Interoperability Centre
      be complex        (SONIC) and an Open RAN test bed to assist in ecosystem development for
                        interoperable solutions.

                        4.5         3GPP standards and releases
  It takes time for     5G network capabilities (latency, service-specific network slicing, quality
       new 3GPP-        guarantees and support for different device types, amongst other
             based      requirements) depend on specific functionalities being implemented in the 5G
 functionalities to     core and radio networks, and for users to adopt the latest devices. While these
be integrated into      network and device functionalities are standardised by the industry based on
     networks and       3GPP releases 17, there is typically a material lag between new releases being
           devices      finalised by 3GPP and fully tested products being available and adopted, both
                        in MNO networks and in the devices available to consumers. The path from
                        release to deployment follows four key stages: standards approval (e.g. 3GPP
                        release 16 or 17); integration into vendor solutions; validation and commercial
                        availability and finally, deployment/adoption.
  The integration       The most advanced 5G use cases are reliant on the latest 5G standards and
 of functionalities     functionalities, which will become available in waves, depending on when
            and the     3GPP specifications are completed and when such specifications are
     availability of    implemented in network equipment and devices. It is typically the case that
reliant use cases       there is a time lag of between twelve and eighteen months between a
      will likely be    specification being studied in 3GPP and it being implemented by vendors (for
          sporadic      examples of the time for 3GPP studies to be completed into Release 16 and
                        17 features and for these specifications to be finalised and ready for

                        17
                             3GPP is a collection of standards organizations that develop standards for telecommunications
                        technologies. Standards are released in waves called “releases”, and each release will contain hundreds of
                        individual technical standards.

                        Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                   51
                                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


                       implementation by vendors, see Figure 4-5). Not all vendors will implement all
                       3GPP optional features and some features might not be implemented by any
                       vendor.
               The     UK MNOs have deployed their public mobile networks using the versions of
  implementation       3GPP equipment that the MNO procured for network launch (likely to be
   of future 3GPP      3GPP Release 15 and Release 16 at the time of producing this report). For 5G
      features and     features and functionalities standardised within future 3GPP releases (e.g.
functionalities will   Rel17 and onwards 18), implementation into networks is dependent on demand.
        depend on      Not all functionalities of every 3GPP release are implemented at the same
demand and cost        time or available in every market. Features may be present in vendors’ ‘base
                       build’, but it is up to the operator to implement it (and this might involve
                       additional costs). 19
        Many new       Full exploitation of new features and functionalities described within Rel17 and
     features and      beyond will rely on evolution of initial 5G networks to deployment of 5G SA
functionalities will   infrastructure. This 5G SA infrastructure is important because in 5G SA, the
       rely on the     5G core network is virtualised and not dependent on 4G networks. It is also
   deployment of       expected that 5G SA virtualised networks will use software implementation
       standalone      that is cloud-natively designed, such that enterprises or industrial users
         networks      already using cloud-based business processes might integrate 5G deployment
                       with these designs .
     The pace of       As MNOs are still planning the transition from NSA to SA architectures, MNOs’
     transition to     implementation of some 5G capabilities – which may be required for some of
      standalone       the more advanced 5G use cases – will be dependent on the speed at which
    networks will      this transition is completed, as well as on 5G SA device penetration. Hence,
    dictate when       some of the more advanced 5G applications that industrial or enterprise
  more advanced        customers might use to enable new and improved business processes might
  5G applications      not be immediately available via public networks.
         become         Figure 4-5: 5G capabilities included in 3GPP Release 16 and 17
        available
                                 2018                2019                  2020              2021                2022
                        Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
                                          Release 16:
                                          - Industrial IoT
                                          - Automated driving
                                          - Enhanced ultra-reliable and
                                             low latency communication
                                          - Integrated access & backhaul
                                          - Improved 5G efficiency
                                             (interference, power etc.)

                                                                       Release 17 priorities:
                                                                       - Unmanned aerial systems
                                                                       - NR MIMO
                                                                       - RAN slicing
                                                                       - Multi SIM
                                                                       - Enhanced industrial IoT
                                                                       - Enhanced V2X services
                                                                       - 5G wireless & wireline convergence

                             Source: 3GPP, Analysys Mason


                       18
                            3GPP has commenced discussions into what features might be included in Release 18, but a timeline for
                       developing Release 18 specifications is not yet available.
                       19
                            As noted by vendors in the DCMS stakeholder workshop

                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                  52
                                                                                                        Realising the Benefits of 5G




   MNOs’ longer      5G SA deployments are occurring in the enterprise and private wireless space
     transition to   as described in the previous section, and these are being trialled extensively 20
      standalone     already. The 5G SA transition within public mobile networks is more complex
means a role for     where and demands evolution of devices as well as network equipment and
private networks     hence is expected to have a longer timescale. As such, private networks are
      in the early   likely to play a role in delivering some 5G features and enable some 5G
delivery of some     consumer groups (e.g. enterprises, factories) to adopt 5G earlier in the 5G
     5G features     deployment cycle.


  The prospects      5G specifications will continue to evolve beyond the currently planned
are for future 5G    releases shown in the diagram above. At the time of producing this report, the
specifications to    priorities for 3GPP Release 18 have not been finalised by 3GPP. Mobile
         be more     equipment vendors are also proposing to expand 5G from the three original
  numerous and       deployment scenarios – enhanced mobile broadband, massive machine-type
         complex     connectivity and ultra-reliable, low latency communications – to include three
                     additional deployments – uplink centric broadband communication, real-time
                     broadband communication and harmonised communication and sensing.
                     Some equipment vendors are also suggesting a further generation of mobile
                     connectivity – 6G – occurring sometime after 2030.

                     4.6          Readiness to deploy and adopt 5G in the UK
   Cross-country     While the roll-out of 5G in the UK and other countries is in its early stages,
studies provide a    there are some cross-country studies that provide a comparative assessment
     comparative     of countries’ readiness to deploy and adopt 5G. These readiness reports often
   assessment of     evaluate readiness to adopt 5G between markets based on scoring different
        countries’   factors, such as availability of infrastructure, 5G pilots and test-beds, spectrum
     readiness to    availability, policy framework and other such factors. The findings from these
       deploy 5G     studies are summarised in Table 4-1.
5G readiness in      Comparing the UK to other international markets where digital adoption and
        the UK is    transformation is expected to be highest, i.e. countries within developed Asia
reasonably high      Pacific, leading Western Europe economies (France, Germany, Switzerland
 and the UK is a     etc.) and the USA (with full details set out in standalone Appendix C):
   leader in the
                     •      The UK typically ranks highly on 5G readiness compared to other markets,
     adoption of
                            but behind market leaders including the US, South Korea, China and
public cloud and
                            Japan.
              AI
                     •      The UK appears to sit amongst the leaders of benchmarked countries with
                            regards to public cloud adoption in firms.
                     •      Similarly for AI, the UK was shown to be an earlier adopter within Europe.
                     •      However, in terms of IoT and robotics and automation, evidence presented
                            places the UK behind leading digital economies.
                     •      While some indicators around government-led efforts to spur automation
                            adoption are positive for the UK (i.e. ranking 8th globally in the Automation



                     20
                          Trial kits vary by operator – for example this solution from Ericsson was mentioned
                     https://www.ericsson.com/en/news/2020/6/ericsson-5g-sa-trial-kits-for-industry

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                     53
                                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


    Readiness Index), implementation of industrial automation and robotics is
    lagging and has dropped below the international average.


Table 4-1: Third party studies on UK 5G adoption – 5G readiness

 Study                     Sources of analysis                 Findings
 Moving to a fibre-        Comparative study –                 UK consumers are “relatively
 enabled UK:               categorising UK relative to         advanced when it comes to demand
 International             France, Germany, Italy and          for digital services”: for “demand for
 experiences on            Sweden                              bandwidth […] the UK came close
 barriers to gigabit                                           behind Sweden, a global leader in
 adoption (WIK 2020)                                           connectivity and digitisation”.
                                                               However, “the UK is behind Sweden
                                                               in the development and usage of
                                                               other applications which could
                                                               necessitate gigabit connectivity in
                                                               the home and for small businesses”
 Europe 5G                 Comparative study –                 The UK placed sixth overall in
 Readiness Index           categorising UK relative to         Europe in this 5G readiness index,
 (inCites Consulting       other markets in Europe.            but with the highest score (5th) for
 2019)                     Ranking was based on the            infrastructure and technology. On
                           following criteria –                selected other criteria, the UK was
                           infrastructure and                  ranked lower than European
                           technology, regulation and          counterparts, such as innovation
                           policy, innovation landscape,       and landscape, and human capital.
                           human capital, country
                           profile and demand
 5G Market Progress        Study ranking countries by          The UK was sixth globally for 5G
 Assessment (OMDIA         available spectrum, service         deployment – behind South Korea
 2020)                     provider launches, network          and Switzerland, as well as the
                           coverage, 5G take-up and            USA, Kuwait, and Qatar.
                           ecosystem
 Global race to 5G         Study ranking countries by          The UK was ranked 5th in this
 update (Analysys          available spectrum, industry        report published in 2019, out of a
 Mason for CTIA            activity (trials, pilots, network   total of 14 selected countries. The
 2019)                     launches), availability of mid-     top four countries were China, USA,
                           band spectrum, availability of      South Korea and Japan.
                           high band spectrum, total
                           spectrum release and
                           Government 5G commitment
                           (strategies, funding, testbeds
                           etc.)
 The Race to 5G            Study ranking countries by          The report identified eight countries
 (Arthur D. Little 2019)   infrastructure drivers (5G          leading the “5G race” and four fast
                           spectrum availability, 5G roll-     followers (the first being the UK) out
                           out commitments, fibre              of 43 countries. “The UK [is] in a
                           coverage, 4G availability           situation in which their regulator
                           etc.) and commercialisation         recently auctioned spectrum and
                           drivers (5G trial intensity and     operators jumped to acquire it. They
                           successes, fibre household          are well advanced in terms of trials
                                                               and face competitive pressure to roll

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                54
                                                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G


                                               penetration, household         out their 5G networks but rank lower
                                               income, 4G usage etc.)         in some infrastructure dimensions.”

                      Source: As listed.
  The willingness
                      In addition to the country studies, other survey-based studies provide insights
    of UK firms to
                      on the attitude of UK businesses towards 5G and their willingness to invest in
   invest in 5G is
                      5G. The results of these studies are summarised in Table 4-2.
not universal due
to some potential     This shows industrial companies in the UK being positive towards taking up
        barriers to   5G solutions, with a willingness to implement in the short term. However,
         adoption     whilst some evidence indicates a willingness of UK businesses to take up 5G
                      solutions, this finding is not universal. For example, some published studies
                      identify potentially significant barriers to 5G adoption in the UK, such as a lack
                      of willingness to pay, investment uncertainty and a lack of awareness and
                      understanding of 5G and its potential benefits (Barclays 2019).
                      Table 4-2: Third party studies on UK 5G adoption – UK industries

                       Study                   Sources of analysis           Findings
                       5G in industrial        Interviews – results broken   • 75% of UK organisations are willing
                       operations              down by country, sub            to implement 5G for operations
                       (Capgemini 2019)        sector or company revenue       within two years of availability (23%
                                               size.                           within one year of availability, and
                                                                               52% between 1-2 years of
                                                                               availability). This is on par with Italy,
                                                                               and better than Spain, the USA,
                                                                               Norway, France, Sweden, South
                                                                               Korea and Germany.
                                                                             • Of all industrial companies
                                                                               surveyed, 66% of all automotive
                                                                               companies were willing to
                                                                               implement 5G for operations within
                                                                               2 years (28% within one year, 38 in
                                                                               1-2 years). Utilities was 69%
                                                                               (26:43), Airport, port and railway
                                                                               was 70% (10:60) etc.
                                                                             • As revenue size increased so too
                                                                               did share of companies planning to
                                                                               implement 5G within 2 years of
                                                                               availability.
                       GWS survey (GWS         GWS polled both 2000 UK       • Awareness of 5G is strong, even if
                       May 2020)               adults and more than 200        it is in early days of deployment in
                                               enterprise organisations        the UK. More than half of the
                                               ranging in size from 100        businesses polled reported that 5G
                                               employees to more than          is “already important to their
                                               5000.                           organisation,” with another 27%
                                                                               saying it will be so in the future. In
                                                                               addition, 26% of businesses said
                                                                               they wanted to see more 5G
                                                                               offerings from their mobile network
                                                                               operator.

                      Source: As listed.

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                            55
                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


                      4.7       Digital investment propensity assessment
                      Since 5G rollout is still being scaled up in the UK and other countries, there is
                      a lack of empirical evidence on the adoption of 5G across the different
                      consumer groups. For the purposes of further analysis and modelling, we
                      have investigated the uptake of other digital technologies by sectors within the
                      identified consumer groups, to provide a benchmark of how likely different
                      sectors/groups might be to adopt ‘new’ technology.
                      We have defined this analysis as a ‘digital investment propensity
                      assessment’, as a means of considering how likely different UK sectors are to
                      adopt 5G services based on wider digital technology adoption in those
                      sectors.
                      The assessment uses historical adoption of selected alternative advanced
                      technologies as an indicator of which consumer groups may have higher
                      willingness to take up 5G solutions. Whilst this digital investment propensity
                      assessment does not provide distinct 5G adoption targets or metrics for
                      consumer groups, it has assisted in gathering insight into the rate at which
                      consumer groups are likely to adopt 5G services in the early years, as well as
                      some indication of the consumer groups that are likely to be early adopters of
                      5G. The findings of this assessment have been used to rank digital investment
                      propensity across UK economic sectors which was further mapped onto our
                      consumer groups and used to calibrate modelled 5G adoption forecasts
                      covered in chapters 6 and 7.
                      The first piece of analysis looked to prioritise which sectors within the UK
                      economy spend and invest the most in digital technology. Secondly, this
                      prioritisation was cross-checked through analysis of historical adoption trends
                      for other advanced technologies by various industries (either globally or UK
                      specific) or for the UK as a whole. A supplementary input to this assessment
                      was consideration of the UK’s current position on digital and 5G adoption.
                      Summary of findings
 Three consumer       From our nine 5G consumer groups, we have identified three groups as
groups have high      having the highest intensity of digital investment and intermediary
digital investment    consumption (it is noted that investment intensity is not universal across all
         propensity   sectors in a consumer group but based on the evidence available, we have
                      assessed technology adoption at the consumer group level rather than
                      specifically for each sector within a consumer group):
                            •   Media and entertainment
                            •   Smart urban
                            •   Public services
    Rurally-located   Additionally, high technology industries generally (e.g. IT industries) are high
firms in high-tech    adopters of technology such as cloud). Most of these high-tech industries are
  industries might    located in areas of the UK that might be assumed to be within the population-
   lag on adoption    led coverage of nationwide MNO 5G roll-outs. However, these industries, if
                      operating in rural locations, might lag on adoption of 5G specifically due to
                      delayed coverage roll-out, patchy coverage or a lack of coverage.




                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                              56
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


Different sectors    From the digital investment propensity assessment that we conducted as part
    are adopting     of this study, it is clear there is variation between the types of digital
         different   technology that different sectors are adopting:
    technologies
                         •    UK sectors within media and entertainment, smart urban and public
                              services consumer groups have a high-level of cloud service adoption
                         •    Industries within the smart urban consumer group (e.g. financial
                              services and high tech industries) are identified as early adopters of AI
                              solutions. Emerging sectors indicating an interest in future AI spend or
                              have already made some investment in AI, include those within the
                              Transport, Manufacturing, Energy and utilities and Media and
                              entertainment consumer groups.
                         •    Transport and manufacturing sectors have shown an appetite to adopt
                              IoT networks and are likely to benefit from the capabilities 5G-based
                              IoT will offer once this is available, e.g. high density capabilities and
                              real time IoT use cases (e.g. asset management, production lines,
                              delivery and logistics tracking, drones and surveillance). Other
                              emerging industries that have shown an appetite for IoT fall within the
                              smart urban sector
                         •    The manufacturing and automotive industries are also likely to have
                              the highest propensity to adopt automation and robotics associated
                              technologies
                         •    The retail and hospitality group generally lag on digital adoption


        The UK is    The assessment also considered the UK’s global position in terms of adoption
  leading in some    of digital technologies. The UK was founding to be leading in adoption of some
technologies and     technologies but lagging for others:
 lagging in others
                         •    Evidence from Eurostat suggests that the UK compares well against
                              the wider EU market on cloud adoption (Figure C.3 and Figure C.4).
                              2018 metrics published by Eurostat (Eurostat 2020), show that at least
                              40% of enterprises in UK, Ireland, Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Belgium
                              and the Netherlands made use of cloud computing solutions. However,
                              on an EU-wide level this drops to 26% of enterprises, largely for email
                              hosting and file storage.
                         •    North America is leading in real-world implementations of AI in
                              operation, with Europe and Asian companies also reporting strong AI
                              initiatives. It is reported that UK is leading within Europe when it comes
                              to AI adoption, where about a fifth (18%) of the UK companies have
                              stepped into the most advanced stage of AI maturity (Business Leader
                              2021).
                         •    According to Vodafone’s IoT Barometer (Vodafone 2019), companies
                              in the Asia–Pacific region are advanced in their adoption of IoT, and
                              43% of companies are already using some form of IoT. Across Europe,
                              the Middle East and Africa, there has been a levelling out of IoT
                              adoption since 2015, falling behind the global average.
                         •    A report conducted by IFR (IFR 2020) found that, in terms of robot
                              density by region, China, Japan, USA, South Korea and Germany

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                57
                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


         have been the top five markets for adoption since 2016. The UK
         appears to be lagging significantly behind leading digital economies in
         industrial robotics adoption and continues to drop below the
         international average. In 2019, around 21,700 industrial robots were
         operating in factories in the UK, an increase of 5% compared to 2018.
         Although the UK´s operational robotics stock has increased, other
         European countries like France, Italy and Germany have seen an
         increase in robot stock in operation of 2-10 times.


The assessment provided limited evidence on propensity for rural industries to
adopt digital technologies. We also excluded the high-speed broadband in
homes and offices consumer group from our digital investment propensity
assessment, on the basis that high-speed broadband is the basis of early 5G
deployment by MNOs, for which adoption can be tracked in the same way as
for previous generations of mobile use (i.e. based on growth in number of 5G
connections, 5G subscribers or similar).




Cambridge Econometrics                                                              58
                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G




Table 4-3: Digital investment propensity assessment summary

 Consumer            Cloud              Automation           IoT          AI
 group                                  and robotics
 Media and
 entertainment
 Public services
 Energy and
 utilities
 Rural
 industries
 Smart urban**
 Transport                              *
 Manufacturing,
 logistics and
 distribution
 High-speed
 broadband into
 homes and
 offices
 Retail and
 hospitality
 * for the automotive industry specifically
 ** for high tech industries and smart cities specifically
 Early           Emerging        Lagging           Limited evidence   Limited evidence      Excluded from
 adopter         adopter         adopter           of adoption        overall               digital readiness
                                                                                            assessment
Source: Analysys Mason


From this analysis we have concluded there is evidence that sectors within
most 5G consumer groups are early adopters of digital technologies. From
this, we mapped potentially early, emerging and lagging adopters of 5G
services in the UK based on their adoption of digital services (see Figure 4-).




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                        59
                                                                                Realising the Benefits of 5G




  Figure 4-6: Timeline of 5G adoption by consumer groups in the UK

       Limited coverage in ‘digital readiness
        assessment’, however, likely initial
      adopter of 5G due eMBB supported use
         cases (validated by stakeholders)
                                         Energy and utilities


                                     Manufacturing,
   Broadband into                    distribution and           Retail and hospitality
     homes and                           transport
       offices

                            Public services
           Media and
          entertainment                           Transport                        Rural industries

                            Smart Urban



                                Expected timeline of 5G adoption


           Early adopters                 Emerging adopters                   Lagging adopters
     Driven by eMBB supported        Driven initially by use of 5G      Referenced to lag in terms of
      use cases, (e.g. FWA and       for IoT use cases as well as          advanced technology
     MBB for homes and offices,          automation/ robotics             adoption or affected by
     AR/VR) and further enabled               thereafter                supply-side barriers such as
         through edge-cloud                                                       coverage
             capabilities

  Source: Literature review, Analysys Mason.


We subsequently used this map of relative timeline of adoption per consumer
group to calibrate 5G adoption forecasts and scenarios forming an input to the
benefits modelling (how the 5G adoption forecasts have been defined is
further outlined in chapter 6).




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                  60
                                                             Realising the Benefits of 5G



5        Barriers to adoption and their impact

This section describes and discusses the key barriers that might affect 5G
adoption in the UK, and also how we might reflect the impact of these barriers
within the adoption forecasts developed from the study.

5.1      Approach
To identify the barriers to 5G adoption and assess their impact, we conducted
a detailed review of the literature and our own analysis. This was supported by
discussions with the DCMS team and 5G stakeholders. We began by
consulting the literature on 5G adoption and barriers in a range of countries
and for a wide range of consumer groups. The findings from this review were
used to identify a high-level typology of the barriers to 5G adoption. Using
these initial categories of barriers, we developed specific questions on what
the key barriers to adopting 5G might be in the UK market. These were used
to gather feedback from stakeholders through interviews and an industry
workshop. In discussion with DCMS, questions on UK-specific barriers were
split into demand-side, and supply-side, barriers. The responses on barriers
were summarised and, along with further analysis, the barriers to 5G adoption
in different consumer groups was further refined and developed to reflect the
most relevant to consumer groups in the UK.

5.2      Overview of the barriers to 5G adoption
While the focus of this study is on 5G demand, both supply-side and demand-
side barriers were reviewed to build an overall picture of the barriers to
adoption. Supply-side barriers were found to fall into three categories:
business case/value concerns; practical deployment barriers; and spectrum-
related barriers. Likewise, demand-side barriers were grouped into three
categories: business case/value concerns; feasibility; and (technical) criticality.
To analyse the relevance of each demand-side barrier to the consumer
groups, we further divided these barriers into macro barriers and micro
barriers, using the below definitions:
•     ‘macro barriers’ were defined as cross-market barriers that cut across
      multiple areas / consumer groups and 5G applications across most of the
      5G market.
•     ‘micro barriers’ were defined as barriers that apply more to some
      consumer groups / 5G applications than others, but can be grouped into
      distinct general categories, e.g. device availability.
An overview of the barriers resulting from our analysis is provided below in
Figure 5-1 and Figure 5-2. Section 5.3 provides a discussion of the barriers,
Section 5.4 discusses the impact of the demand-side barriers on each
consumer groups, while detailed summaries of the evidence behind each
barrier is provided in Section 5.5 and Section 5.6.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                               61
                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G




Figure 5-1: Supply-side barriers


                                     Supply-side barriers




    Business case / value            Practical deployment
                                                                             Spectrum
           concerns                         barriers


  • 5G commercialisation           • radio deployment and         • cost of spectrum/annual
  prioritises B2C initially /      regulatory issues              licence fees
  proven use cases                 • integrating with existing    • lack of availability of full
  • features available in          network and systems            5G spectrum portfolio
  3GPP releases not fully          • migration to virtualised     • other spectrum related
  implemented in                   stand-alone 5G core            barriers
  vendor/operator networks         networks
  • barriers within the value      • geographic coverage is
  chain                            required for some use
                                   cases
                                   • access to and
                                   availability of backhaul


Figure 5-2: Demand-side barriers


                                   Demand-side barriers




   Business case / value
                                         Feasibility               (Technical) criticality
          concerns



 Macro barriers:                Micro barriers:                  Macro barriers:
 • willingness to pay           • ecosystem not ready/           • lack of evidence of 5G’s
                                fully available                  suitability / use cases
  Micro barriers:               • complexities of
 • lack of business case /      integrating new 5G               Micro barriers:
 understanding of ROI           solutions with existing          • existing technologies
 • concern over upfront         technology and systems           (e.g. fibre/4G/Wi-Fi) are
 (capital) costs                • cultural resistance to         seen as sufficient
 • lack of understanding of     change                           • lack of understanding of
 total cost of ownership        • security and data              5G and the benefits
 (TCO) / concern over           privacy concerns                 using 5G offers
 ongoing costs/ monthly
 data costs



Cambridge Econometrics                                                                             62
                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


                      5.3      Barriers to 5G adoption in the UK
                      This section presents a discussion of the demand-side and supply-side
                      barriers, drawing on the findings from the literature review and other evidence
                      presented to us during the study.
                      Supply-side barriers
     Absence of a     A key type of supply-side barrier is concerns over the business case for
   clear business     investment, resulting in a lack of further investment in 5G coverage from public
case by MNOs to       mobile networks, and a lack of a full range of 5G functionalities in public
   invest at scale    mobile networks to enable specific use case deployment requiring the latest
  limits coverage     3GPP functionality. MNOs and vendors need a clear business case to
     and available    underpin further investment in 5G public mobile networks (both coverage and
    functionalities   full functionality features of 5G). In some cases, demand needs to be
                      demonstrated at scale across the UK, from different regional or local users –
                      e.g. for transport systems, for operators to invest in fully interoperable and
                      scalable solutions.
     The business     How MNOs might develop additional revenue from deploying 5G for consumer
          case for    use is currently not clear. Whilst new revenue streams could be generated
     investment is    from offering advanced use cases to other consumer groups, the business
 undermined by a      case for this additional investment is unclear, as identified above. Trends in
‘chicken and egg’     4G adoption suggest that whilst data consumption by individual consumers
          problem     using smartphones and other connected devices has grown considerably (and
                      continues to rise), average revenue per user (ARPU) from individual
                      consumers is either flat or declining in many markets. Whilst 5G roll-out will
                      require significant investment by MNOs, demand from new consumer groups
                      (e.g. industrial or enterprise) is still emerging. It is these new consumer groups
                      that might demonstrate greatest demand for advanced 5G use cases such as
                      automation, 5G-based robotics and advanced, 5G-based IoT, but this would
                      only emerge once users are confident that 5G solutions meet their specific
                      requirements. Demonstrating that solutions meet requirements for industrial
                      and enterprise users is complex because individual organisations might
                      require bespoke functionalities relevant to their specific applications and
                      locations, and/or will have specific coverage and capacity requirements for
                      their solutions, which might not match the population-drive infrastructure
                      rollout that MNOs have planned for 5G consumer use. This ‘chicken and egg’
                      problem of 5G use cases i.e. the need to build infrastructure supporting
                      unknown use cases and/or uncertain assumptions on how users might use 5G
                      technologies in future, presents a key risk both for MNOs, and for potential 5G
                      users. A major consequence of this ‘chicken and egg’ problem is that relatively
                      few large business users might be willing to invest in 5G solutions if this
                      investment is ‘at risk’ (i.e. ahead of assurance that 5G will meet specific
                      locational/application needs). This may require the MNOs to take on more of
                      this investment risk. Conversely, the MNOs might find it hard to justify this
                      investment until it is clearer how new 5G use cases will manifest (i.e. in which
                      areas, as well as other specific connectivity needs). It is possible that this
                      issue might be overcome over time as consumer 5G use migrates from
                      current NSA devices to using 5G SA devices. Once SA devices are adopted
                      over time by consumers, this might drive adoption of 5G SA features more
                      generally (e.g. by enterprise and industrial users). Over time, this 5G SA
                      adoption would therefore incentivise MNOs to invest in more widespread

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                              63
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     implementation. An alternative way for MNOs to encourage enterprise and
                     industrial adoption of 5G would be to subsidise the 5G consumption (e.g.
                     outcome-based type contracts).
  There is some      There is some scepticism amongst some potential 5G users over the pace at
 doubt about the     which MNOs will invest in extending the capabilities of public mobile networks.
  pace of MNOs       As such, MNOs need to be positioned as active enablers of the most
     5G roll-out     advanced 5G services, moving beyond the early and most feasible business
                     cases of 5G services offered to existing subscribers. As mentioned previously,
                     the market is yet to become familiar with offering the sorts of differentiated
                     enterprise and vertically-focused solutions that fully functional 5G (including
                     virtualised standalone core networks and network slicing) envisages.
       5G private    Given a general uncertainty over timescales for further evolution of public
networks may be      mobile networks towards full enabled 5G features (i.e. including 5G-based
  the best option    machine-type connections and ultra-reliable, low latency communications as
         for early   per the original 5G vision), some potential 5G users (and indeed MNOs) might
        industrial   feel that 5G private networks may be better placed to serve earlier adopter
         adopters    industrial and enterprise users. The specific connectivity needs of those
                     customers would be a key reason for using private deployments given that in
                     current non-standalone 5G public network deployments, there will be
                     challenges in offering differentiated connectivity with different characteristics in
                     some areas of the network compared to others due to the risk of interference.
                     Therefore, utilising shared access spectrum in the 3.8-4.2GHz band rather
                     than using the MNO’s nationally available spectrum portfolio enables MNOs or
                     other providers to provide specific connectivity such as uplink-oriented
                     capacity where needed.
       There are     A number of practical barriers to mobile deployment are widely discussed in
various practical    published reports, and well known to DCMS through work contributing to the
     deployment      digital connectivity portal 21. Several studies present evidence for practical
  barriers on the    deployment barriers such as relating to site acquisition, backhaul, power and
     supply-side     other infrastructure availability, and fibre reach (Infosys 2019; Analysys Mason
                     2018; OECD 2019; Nokia 2020).
      Spectrum       Timely deployment of 5G depends on suitable spectrum being available for
 concerns, such      the different types of potential network/user. In the UK, commercial nationwide
  as availability    5G networks providing 5G services to consumers are using the 3.4-3.8GHz
   and cost, are     spectrum available to MNOs together with other spectrum bands that MNOs
 also barriers to    have been licensed to use. Private or local 5G deployments in the UK are
         supply      being enabled through Ofcom’s shared access spectrum available in the 3.8-
                     4.2GHz band. During course of this project Ofcom awarded 700MHz and 3.6-
                     3.8GHz spectrum to UK MNOs in March 2021. Both of these bands are suited
                     to 5G use. As such we do not expect spectrum availability for nationwide 5G
                     network deployment by MNOs to be a significant barrier to 5G adoption in the
                     UK. Ofcom’s shared access licences also allow for private 5G network
                     deployment, on a local basis.




                     21
                          Digital Connectivity Portal - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                64
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


         Different     There are different approaches to 5G private/local licensing across different
 spectrum bands        markets in Europe. Lack of a common spectrum band for private 5G
       for private     deployment might represent a potential barrier to achieving economies of
networks hinders       scale for private 5G deployment. Globally, there are also varying approaches
   economies of        on private 5G deployment, meaning that a large industrial company operating
             scale     either in multiple European markets or globally might face challenges to
                       procure a 5G private network solution compatible with the spectrum and
                       technological conditions applicable to each of its markets. The issues of
                       device availability, cost and demand prioritisation by suppliers may propagate
                       into the UK 5G market as scale is achieved in other leading regions.
                       Demand-side barriers
   Concerns over       As with the supply-side, concerns over the business case for investing in 5G is
         business      a barrier on the demand-side. This demonstrates the ‘chicken and egg’
  case/value is a      problem described above under the supply-side barriers heading – both the
key demand-side        supply-side and the demand-side need each other to demonstrate the
        barrier for    business case for 5G adoption. Individual and business willingness to pay for
  individuals and      5G services could represent a key barrier affecting 5G demand across all
      businesses       consumer groups. Other barriers related to the business case/value of 5G
                       investment might include: lack of business case/understanding of ROI;
                       concern over upfront capital costs; and lack of visibility of total cost of
                       ownership (TCO) / concern over ongoing/monthly costs.
                An     On the demand-side, the feasibility of 5G adoption depends on, amongst other
underdeveloped         factors, the readiness of the ecosystem. Over and above network supply,
   5G ecosystem        demand would need to be supported by an entire 5G ecosystem of embedded
  and complexity       devices, software, chipsets and modems. Due to the current lack of scale of
 with integration      demand, consumers implementing 5G technology may be faced with a high
      with legacy      cost of equipment, exacerbated by the need for more tailored devices and
    technologies       solutions to meet their standards and spectrum requirements, escalating costs
       hinder the      and extending lead time to device production. Another feasibility barrier to
 feasibility of 5G     adoption is the complexity of integrating new 5G solutions with existing
         adoption      technology and systems. It is noted that the difficulties here lie with
                       implementation of a bridge supporting legacy technologies rather than with the
                       new technologies themselves.
          Security     As cited in several studies, security and data privacy concerns might represent
    concerns also      a barrier to 5G adoption by some consumer groups, and may also hold back
       hinder the      the feasibility of users adopting 5G whilst security and/or data privacy issues
  feasibility of 5G    are resolved, compatible with different industrial security requirements.
         adoption      Multiple surveys we reviewed found concerns around data security to be a
                       major barrier to 5G demand (Digital Catapult 2019; Ericsson 2018; Infosys
                       2019; GSMA 2020b, Nokia 2020), with moving data to the cloud a particular
                       concern. Some users prefer that the data which is generated on their site does
                       not leave their site, hence the ability to have local processing on their site is
                       very important.
  Many users do        Another type of barrier relates to the extent to which potential adopters of 5G
  not view 5G as       view the technology as critical for meeting their future needs (or whether
  critical for their   existing solutions might be sufficient). Some studies we reviewed pointed to a
             needs     lack of evidence of 5G’s suitability as holding back demand. This was
                       supported by responses from stakeholders, which indicated a reluctance by
                       some potential users to adopt 5G until they had seen it demonstrated and
                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                              65
                                                                                    Realising the Benefits of 5G


                       proven elsewhere; or that they were not convinced that 5G was essential for
                       their needs. This points to a need for a diverse range of use cases to be
                       showcased over 5G infrastructure in order to demonstrate the benefits in
                       specific environments. Similarly, a lack of technical understanding of 5G might
                       prevent some users from implementing solutions. This lack of evidence and
                       understanding of 5G’s applications and implementation requirements may be
                       the reason many consumers see existing technologies (e.g. fibre/4G/Wi-Fi) as
                       sufficient to meet their needs.
    Testbeds and       Access to the 5G Testbeds and Trials (5GTT) programme is expected to be of
     trials play an    significant importance to larger and smaller businesses, and public sector
 important role in     users, looking to understand the full capabilities benefits of 5G to meet their
   demonstrating       specific needs and environment. Testbeds and trials are generally less
  the value of 5G      relevant for validating individual consumer use of 5G (i.e. mobile broadband),
           to users    since this use case exists in the UK 5G networks already. This might be one
                       reason why MNOs have not been active partners in initial 5G Testbed and
                       Trials projects, although it is noted that MNOs are now increasingly involved.
                       There appears to be demand from businesses for increased diffusion of
                       findings from relevant 5G trials and testbed projects so that users not involved
                       in the projects can still benefit from the findings. As such, inviting industry
                       players to witness the benefits of relevant 5G projects within the testbeds and
                       trials programme may be useful, along with publicising the outcomes.
The outcomes of        For progression of the 5GTT in the UK, it would be helpful if outcomes of the
  UK 5G test bed       programme are published including details of solutions used, breakdown on
and trials need to     upfront costs, and benefits delivered by the trial or use case (e.g. improvement
   be expressed        in ROI, productivity, etc.). As the 5G market evolves it is anticipated the 5GTT
     more clearly      projects should go beyond the proof of concept (PoC) stage, towards
                       demonstrating benefits in real world environments. An increased focus on key
                       sectors might also be beneficial.



                      5.4     Relevance of demand-side barriers within different consumer
                              groups in the UK
                       Based on our analysis we consider that demand-side barriers can be split into
                       two types:
                       -    ‘macro barriers’: cross-market barriers that cut across multiple areas /
                            consumer groups and 5G applications across most of the 5G market. The
                            most relevant macro barriers identified through the study are:
                                o   willingness of individuals and businesses to pay for 5G services
                                o   lack of evidence of 5G’s suitability for the specific use case
                                    connectivity requirements, together with uncertainty over timing of
                                    investment into full functionality 5G needed to enable specific use
                                    cases and features to be adopted at scale across the UK
                       -    ‘micro barriers’: micro barriers apply more to some consumer groups / 5G
                            applications than others, but can be grouped into distinct general
                            categories, e.g. device availability.




                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                               66
                                                                                                                                           Realising the Benefits of 5G


         o   Barriers specific to different consumer groups are outlined in Table
             5.1, which presents our view of what micro demand-side barriers
             are likely to affect each consumer group

         o   these consumer-group specific barriers may affect the timing
             and/or rate of adoption for the sectors within that consumer group.

It is noted that we have assessed barriers at the consumer group level, which
ignores that in practice, individual sectors within consumer groups might take
up 5G solutions at difference paces. In this study we found there to be
insufficient evidence to define the impact of barriers at the sector-specific
level.

The key micro barriers affecting most consumer groups were found to be a
lack of understanding of 5G and the benefits of using 5G, the ecosystem not
being ready / fully available and lack of business case / understanding of ROI
(outlined in red in Table 5.1). The output of our analysis is shown below. It
should be noted there is significant uncertainty surrounding the key areas of
concern over 5G adoption within different consumer groups, and sectors
within those consumer groups. Hence the table below represents our best
view on the key barriers that might exist per consumer group, at the time of
producing this report.
Table 5-1: Micro barriers per consumer group

                                             1                     2                   3                     4               5            6                        7                                          8                                          9
                                   Media and Entertainment




                                                                                                                                                                                                High-speed broadband
                                                                                                                                                   Manufacturing logistics



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       into homes and offices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Retail and Hospitality
                                                                               Energy and Utilities


                                                                                                      Rural industries




                                                                                                                                                                             and distribution
                                                             Public services




                                                                                                                         Smart urban


                                                                                                                                       Transport




Lack of understanding of 5G
and the benefits using 5G
offers

Existing technologies (e.g.
fibre/4G/Wi-Fi) are seen as
sufficient

Ecosystem not ready / fully
available

Complexities of integrating with
existing technology and
systems

Cultural resistance to change

Security concerns / moving
data to the cloud



Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           67
                                                                                    Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    Lack of business case /
                    understanding of return on
                    investment (ROI)

                    Concern over upfront (capital)
                    costs

                    Lack of understanding of total
                    cost of ownership (TCO) /
                    concern over ongoing
                    costs/monthly data costs
                    Source: Analysys Mason, Literature review.


                    Further supporting evidence on the supply-side and demand-side barriers
                    described above and how these might impact 5G adoption in the UK, based
                    on the evidence captured in this study, is summarised below.

                    5.5       Supply-side barriers – supporting evidence
            Radio   In a report for the broadband stakeholder group, Analysys Mason (2018)
     deployment     identified planning regulations as a specific legislation barrier:
   technical and
regulatory issues         •   “There is a lack of consistency in how local authorities apply planning
                              rules and regulations vary across the devolved nations. […] The
                              uncertainty this creates is hampering operators from gaining access to
                              new sites and upgrading existing ones.”
                          •   “Fragmented application of planning regulations for mobile equipment,
                              and a lack of best-practice guidance, introduces additional costs for
                              both local authorities and network providers and is limiting the ability of
                              network providers to plan an efficient deployment of 5G.”

                    Previous published surveys also indicate several supply-side challenges. For
                    example, 441% of respondents identified ‘entirely new 5G radio deployment’
                    as a deployment challenge, 32% of respondents identified ‘integration with
                    existing network and systems’, and 52% identified ‘government regulations’ as
                    an adoption barrier to 5G (this was the second most common barrier
                    identified) (Infosys 2019).
                    The European Commission published a recommendation in 2020 about “a
                    common Union toolbox” for 5G. It highlighted issues with regulatory
                    procedures and stated that “Member states should […] make improvements in
                    the following areas (i) streamlining permit granting procedures […] (ii)
                    increasing transparency […] (iii) expanding the right to access existing
                    physical infrastructure controlled by public sector bodies and (iv) improving the
                    dispute resolution mechanism” (European Commision 2020b).
                    “The introduction of 5G presents incumbent operators with new business
                    opportunities and new business models. It also constrains current forms of
                    competition, while opening up new ones. Hence, regulators and competition
                    authorities will need to appreciate the new rules of the game and will have to
                    be vigilant to assure competition is promoted and investment stimulated. This
                    applies at the Member State level, as well as the EU level” (Cerre 2019).


                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                  68
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


                      In 2019 OECD published a report on “The Road to 5G Networks”. This
                      highlighted that “new regulatory issues arise with 5G, and one main concern
                      for stakeholders relates to power density regulation (or electromagnetic limits
                      in a given location)”. The report stated that “key regulatory issues will include:
                      streamlining rights of way (to deploy massive numbers of small cells and
                      backhaul connecting the cells), efficient spectrum management, deployment
                      and access to backhaul and backbone facilities, and new forms of
                      infrastructure sharing. … 5G will make new demands on all stakeholders in
                      areas such as rights of way, particularly in terms of the location and backhaul
                      to support smaller cells (OECD 2019).



 Integrating with     43% of respondents identified ‘integration with existing network and systems’
existing network      as a deployment challenge (Infosys 2019). 38% of supply (telecoms and
    and systems       media) respondents said that ‘integrating with existing network and systems’
                      was a deployment challenge (Infosys 2019).

       Migration to   38% of respondents identified ‘virtualised 5G core deployment’ as a
virtualised stand-    deployment challenge (Analysys Mason 2018).
    alone 5G core
         networks     “The current biggest barrier to roll-out is undoubtedly economic, with the
                      business case being balanced against the risks of investing […] more
                      infrastructure needs to be deployed (antennae, base stations and small cells –
                      as well as the fibre-optic cables to connect these). This all costs significant
                      levels of capital… the overarching barrier to the UK being a 5G leader is one
                      of investment uncertainty” (Analysys Mason 2018).

                      “5G will accommodate a large variety of scenarios in terms of usage;
                      therefore, the network architecture will have to be flexible to meet this
                      demand. One way to introduce this flexibility is through network slicing in order
                      to improve efficiency” (OECD 2019).




   Geographic         “The biggest barrier to adoption is coverage, with 54% of those who are not
   coverage is        currently planning for it saying they’re waiting for 5G to be available in more
   required for       places. It’s a particular barrier for larger, multisite and multinational
some use cases        businesses, which would prefer to be able to implement 5G services
                      everywhere rather than have some locations running ahead of others” (Nokia
                      2020)
                      Even in areas where 5G is available, 10% of consumers cite “coverage area
                      too limited” as a barrier to use (Nokia 2020b). 18% of UK enterprises pointed
                      to lack of coverage as a stumbling block Nokia 2020c).



   Access to and      “An increase in network densification raises the question of having sufficient
    availability of   backhaul capable of meeting the requirements of 5G […] access to backhaul
       backhaul       and investment in NGA networks [is a] key enabler of 5G […] [small] cells will
                      need to be connected to backhaul, underlining the need for increased
                      investment in next generation network deployment” (OECD 2019).

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                               69
                                                                                 Realising the Benefits of 5G




5G commerciali-       (Deloitte China 2018b) highlighted that “centred round industry application
sation prioritises    scenarios, 5G network deployment will be driven by applications. In the short
    B2C initially /   and medium term, 5G will be implemented firstly in the application scenarios
     proven use       of enhancing mobile broadband”. Elaborating that “due to high investment and
           cases      incomplete standards in relation to 5G deployment, it is expected that telecom
                      operators will adopt longer-term and more flexible deployment based on the
                      needs of application scenarios. Application scenarios of enhancing mobile
                      broadband will be implemented firstly in regions of high user density.
                      Correspondingly, downstream application scenarios with mature technology
                      and high economic value would be given priority in the implementation of 5G
                      network. More technical barriers will be broken down over time, and economic
                      value brought by 5G-based downstream applications will be increasingly
                      emerging in more scenarios”.
                      A Mobilise Global (2019, Mobilise Global 2019) whitepaper states “it is
                      becoming clear that enterprises are not convinced that telecom operators can
                      meet their needs, and as a result, are building out their own private networks”,
                      explaining that “in the 5G era, that operator platforms will need to support
                      massive IoT, network slices using virtualised network functions, and common
                      enablers and APIs. To fully address these business-oriented opportunities,
                      operators will need to focus on business-to-business (B2B) and business-to-
                      business-to-consumer (B2B2C) business models”. The same paper also cited
                      “a recent GSMA paper” where “they put forward the argument that “enhanced
                      mobile broadband (eMBB) will be the key proposition in early 5G deployments
                      and will drive increased performance, functionality and efficiency across
                      society. This is the clearest, potential 5G use case and will support the
                      delivery of high definition video (e.g. TV and gaming), immersive
                      communication (e.g. video calling and augmented & virtual reality) and smart
                      city services (e.g. video cameras for surveillance).””



       Features       “The standard setting process is [not] completed. In fact, the industry is now
     available in     working on Release 16, where new 5G technologies will expand the
 3GPP releases        ecosystem. Commercial launches from 2021-22 are expected to be based on
        not fully     Release 16, which will focus on IoT usage scenarios (i.e. massive machine
 implemented in       type communications and ultra-reliable low-latency communications). More
vendor/operator       specifically, Release 16 of the standard, expected to be finalised in June 2019,
       networks       is focusing on a variety of topics, such as Vehicle-to-everything (V2X)
                      applications, 5G satellite access, Local Area Network support in 5G, wireless
                      and wireline convergence for 5G, network slicing and the IoT, among others”
                      (OECD 2019).

                      76% of Ericsson (2018) respondents identified ‘lack of standards’ as a key
                      barrier to 5G adoption in 2017 – the second most common barrier that year.

                      “There is some ambiguity in the term 5G, which may be part of the reason why
                      businesses are holding off on investment. In fact there are no internationally
                      agreed specifications or definition for a 5G network yet” (Barclays 2019).


                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                             70
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


   Barriers within     In 2016 Cisco published a white paper looking into the “vertical value creation
  the value chain      of 5G”. It found that “with operator value continuing to shift away from basic
                       connectivity services, the 5G mobile architecture needs to enable operators to
                       use their networking assets to quickly and efficiently support new value-added
                       services”. Explaining that “conventional cellular networks have looked to
                       interface with third parties, exposing a limited set of core network capabilities
                       and often using proprietary interfaces. But 5G requirements include the ability
                       to accelerate integration of 5G connectivity services into a wide range of
                       vertical systems” (CISCO 2016).
                       A Deloitte (Deloitte 2018b) report states “in the age of 5G, the role of telecom
                       operators would be extended from providing 5G infrastructure and connection
                       services to participating in the development of 5G-enabled downstream
                       application scenarios and driving 5G investment with the maturity of
                       downstream applications, thereby building a closed business loop”. The report
                       identifies “co-development of vertical industry platforms: e.g. co-development
                       of platforms related to IoV, smart healthcare and smart factories, etc. with
                       other partners in the ecosystem” as part of the “evolution of the business
                       model of telecom operators”.
                       (Mobilise Global 2019) said “we expect the initial target segments will be the
                       consumer market and ‘horizontal’ enterprise services (e.g. laptop
                       connectivity). Whilst there is the potential to offer new services to industrial
                       verticals - such as autonomous vehicles for the automotive sector, this is
                       some way in the future and in fact might never materialise due to the
                       significant infrastructure investment required. However we may see new
                       innovations such as UAV (unmanned aerial vehicles, drones), developing into
                       a potential new segment/ application category.”
          Cost of      “While 5G, like 4G, is not proving to be the cash bonanza that was 3G, the
spectrum/ annual       sums already spent are high. The spend created at auctions per MHz/pop is
     licence fees      improbably uneven relative to likely demand or requirements; it is to a large
                       extent a function of the way the auctions are set up. So for example there is
                       insufficient difference on the demand side to explain why 3.5GHz spectrum in
                       Italy commanded a value some seven times higher than in Finland.” (ETNO
                       2021).
                       “Member States should be encouraged to identify spectrum authorisation rules
                       that aim to apply a pro-investment spectrum pricing methodology […] avoid
                       spectrum scarcity that leads to higher bids in spectrum auctions” (European
                       Commision 2020b).


           Lack of     Lack of availability of the full 5G spectrum portfolio (i.e. 700MHz, 3.6GHz and
availability of full   26GHz spectrum bands) might be a supply-side barrier in markets where
   5G spectrum         these bands have not been made available. However, as of March 2021 (after
          portfolio    receiving stakeholder input) Ofcom awarded available 700MHz and 3.6-
                       3.8GHz spectrum to UK MNOs. Additionally, if the 26GHz band becomes
                       available in the next 12 months for mobile use in outdoor environments (e.g.
                       by MNOs), we would expect the relevance and significance of this supply
                       barrier to be low. There are some 5G use cases that rely on reliable uplink
                       capacity (e.g. immersive media experiences, industrial use cases such as
                       remote piloting of equipment),. This uplink capacity requirement might vary at
                       a local level, which is currently difficult to deploy using nationally planned
                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                              71
                                                                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


                       eMBB networks since variations in uplink and downlink dimensioning would
                       give rise to additional interference issues. Spectrum such as the 26GHz band
                       might provide the MNOs with additional options to provision capacity in
                       different ways at a localised level.
                       “Roll-out of 5G in Europe has been patchy, and 5G still represents a low
                       single-digit percentage of total connections in all countries. One factor that
                       holds back the market is slow and patchy releases of spectrum, which often
                       creates an artificially high cost of spectrum” (ETNO 2021).
                       Analysys Mason (2018) identified access to spectrum as a specific legislation
                       barrier: “Insufficient spectrum and barriers to accessing spectrum, particularly
                       for local providers and for indoor systems may inhibit wider deployment of 5G”
                       “The European Electronic Communications Code sets a common deadline of
                       the end of 2020 for the Member States to allow use of the 3.4-3.8 GHz band
                       and at least 1GHz of the 24.25-27.5GHz pioneer frequency band for 5G. In
                       addition, Decision (EU) 2017/8999 sets a common deadline of 30 June 2020
                       for the Member States to allow use of the 700 MHz pioneer frequency band for
                       5G. […] Member States should avoid or minimise any delays in allowing use
                       of 5G pioneer frequency bands due to the COVID-19 crisis” (European
                       Commision 2020b).
                       “Spectrum is the primary essential input for wireless communications, and
                       therefore, its timely availability is of critical importance for 5G” (OECD 2019).

                      5.6        Demand-side barriers – supporting evidence
                       Macro barriers – supporting evidence
Lack of evidence       The evidence we have captured supporting a need for additional guidance to
of 5G’s suitability    be available on 5G use (i.e. ‘lack of evidence of 5G’s suitability’ as a barrier) is
     / use cases       as follows.
                       In 2019 Digital Catapult interviewed more than 40 UK manufacturing
                       executives, moderated three round-table discussions and carried out an
                       industry survey. Survey respondents’ companies were located all across the
                       UK (ranging from 5% in Wales to 20% in London) and varied in size from 1-50
                       employees (38% of respondents) to more than 2500 employees (31% of
                       respondents). The study found that “5G is nascent, however, making
                       examples of proven ROI in deployments scarce” (Digital Catapult 2019).


                       During 2016 and 2017, (Ericsson 2018) conducted a survey of companies with
                       at least 1000 employees across ten industries 22 worldwide, interviewing
                       approximately 100 executives per industry. The fourth most common key
                       barrier in Ericsson’s 2017 survey was ‘too soon to know what the real benefits
                       will be’ which was selected as a key barrier to adoption of 5G by 62% of
                       respondents, up from 50% in 2016. Additionally, in 2016, 51% of respondents
                       identified ‘lack of applications’ and 56% identified ‘lack of use cases’ as key



                       22
                            Automotive, retail, media and entertainment, manufacturing, energy and utilities, agriculture, public
                       transport, financial services, healthcare and public safety.


                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                       72
                                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G


                   barriers to 5G adoption. By 2017 those numbers had dropped slightly to 41%
                   and 47% respectively.
                   (Infosys 2019) conducted a research survey in 2019 of 850 industry leaders
                   from firms with more than USD1 billion revenues across six broad industry
                   categories 23. The respondents were primarily US-based (49%) but 13%
                   respondents were UK-based. 42% of respondents chose ‘no compelling use
                   case’ as an adoption barrier to 5G.
                   (Nokia 2020) surveyed 1000 IT decision-makers in the US and the UK from
                   small, medium and large organisations across seven sectors 24. They found
                   that “decision-makers become enthused about 5G when they see specific
                   contexts in which it can be used, suggesting that concrete examples and case
                   studies will help to speed adoption.”




  Willingness to   GigaTag’s Interim Report (GigaTAG 2020)found that “consumers may be
            pay    unwilling to pay much more than they do now for a gigabit-capable connection.
                   This may be because there is not currently a significant benefit to them, or due
                   to price sensitivity”.
                   (Which? 2020) found that “only 18% of broadband decision-makers would be
                   willing to pay more than they do now to have gigabit-capable broadband”.
                   Although (Nokia 2020b) found that “50% are willing to pay more for 5G”.


                   Micro barriers - supporting evidence
         Lack of   A Barclays study (Barclays 2019) surveyed 526 medium-sized and large
understanding of   businesses from a wide range of sectors 25. Across British businesses,
     5G and the    Barclays found that “there’s a lack of understanding of what 5G can do for
  benefits using   industry - only 28% of businesses know what 5G is and what it could do on a
       5G offers   practical level”. “14% of British firms are not even aware of 5G” and “more
                   than half [of the managers that know what 5G is] were unsure about how it
                   would work practically”, and “only 9% of managers plan to invest significantly
                   in enabling 5G operations over the next 5 years”. Furthermore “most British
                   firms don’t know that 5G will arrive in the next 12 to 18 months”. The report
                   went on to highlight that “this blind spot is not just concentrated in certain
                   regions, as might be expected”, but was prevalent throughout the UK.


                   Digital Catapult’s (2019) study identified “current lack of understanding of how
                   5G differs from other connectivity solutions” as another key challenge. More
                   than 30% of survey respondents listed ‘lack of skilled staff’ as one of the


                   23
                        Consumer goods, retail and logistics (20%); communication, media and technology (15%); energy and
                   utilities (9%); financial services and insurance (12%); healthcare, life sciences, government and agriculture
                   (18%); and industrial manufacturing, automotive and high tech (26%).
                   24
                        Energy, retail, manufacturing, government and public safety, automotive and transportation, media and
                   advertising, and education.
                   25
                        The respondents came from the manufacturing, retail, technology, media and telecoms, business
                   services, healthcare, educations, hospitality and leisure, logistics and charitable sectors.

                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                     73
                                                                                    Realising the Benefits of 5G


biggest barriers to deployment of 5G technology for their organisation and
more than 40% chose ‘not knowing where to start, who to speak to’.
Additionally only one third of manufacturing companies say they have “good
knowledge of 5G”.
Cerre’s whitepaper on ambitions for Europe (Cerre 2019) in the 2019-2024
period stated that “it appears that the transition from 4G to 5G lacks the
stepwise improvement that has led to the success of 2G-GSM”.
49% of (Infosys 2019) respondents cited ‘understanding of the technology’ as
an adoption barrier for 5G. Lack of understanding and relevant skills relating to
5G requires training and reskilling of the workforce, and 51% of respondents
selected ‘Training and hiring’ as an adoption barrier to 5G.
As IoT is a complementary tool to 5G emergence, barriers to IoT adoption
may cascade to 5G as well. As such we reviewed an IoT enterprise survey
conducted by GSMA Intelligence in 2018, 2019 and 2020 to collect insights
from more than 2000 enterprises with at least 20 employees representing
eight vertical sectors 26 and 18 countries 27. (GSMAi 2020b) found that 38% of
enterprises felt ‘a lack of in-house skills’ was a challenge for IoT deployment.
(GigaTAG 2020) identified ‘lack of awareness’ as a barrier to consumer
adoption of gigabit-capable broadband, stating that consumers were ‘unclear
how it differs to other connections (on the market and their own)’. They also
identified that “Understanding: of ‘gigabit-capable broadband’ is low amongst
businesses across the UK”, with CBI data showing that 14% of respondent
businesses “didn’t know what gigabit connectivity is”, with 36% of firms
indicating that “not knowing when gigabit-capable connectivity would be
available in their area was a barrier to adoption”. Additionally, “the GigaTAG’s
research so far indicates that businesses also face a range of skills barriers
that hinder adoption: of firms that hadn’t already adopted gigabit capable
connectivity, almost one in ten (9%) business respondents in the CBI’s survey
said they did not have the skills needed to adopt gigabit-capable technologies
effectively”.
Analysys Mason (2018) interviewed 23 stakeholders and received comments
from government departments. They identified one overarching issue for 5G
deployment: the need to clearly articulate the value that 5G roll-out in the UK
will bring. “Both industry stakeholders and local authorities raised overarching
concerns that:
•      There is a need for greater clarity and wider promotion of the value of 5G
       roll-out, and clearer definition of the UK’s 5G strategy, to reduce
       uncertainty for industry
•      There is a lack of awareness of nationwide 5G priorities within local
       authorities, which risks delaying 5G roll-out if not addressed in the short
       term”




26
     Retail, utilities, transportation, healthcare, public sector, manufacturing, automotive and consumer
electronics.
27
     Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Russia, South
Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, UK and USA.

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                      74
                                                                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


                       Of those surveyed by (Nokia 2020), a large minority (30%) said “they need
                       more information about what 5G can do for their organisation before starting to
                       plan”. This lack of information was the second biggest barrier to adoption
                       identified after lack of 5G coverage.
                       A Nokia study (Nokia 2020b) of more than 3000 adults aged 18 and older who
                       are smartphone owners, broadband internet users, and the primary decision
                       makers in their household in the USA, the UK and South Korea (1000 from
                       each 28) found that although 80% of consumers familiar with 5G find it
                       appealing, only 23% of those unfamiliar with 5G find it appealing – showing
                       the impact of lack of understanding of 5G on likely adoption. The
                       corresponding (Nokia 2020c) enterprise survey which surveyed 1628
                       technology purchasing decision makers in eight markets 29 and across six
                       industry sectors 30 found that “companies may appreciate the benefits of 5G in
                       theory, but not all understand how they would actually use it within their
                       organisation”, with 14% of UK respondents saying “a key barrier is that
                       decision-makers within the business do not understand 5G”, 12% saying “they
                       don’t know enough about it themselves” and 9% saying “I don’t understand the
                       true benefits”. This was reinforced by the 36% of global respondents who said
                       that “a better understanding of 5G, and the benefits it offers, would encourage
                       them to invest more”.


           Existing    Roughly 25% of (Digital Catapult 2019) survey respondents listed ‘existing
     technologies      network solutions cover my needs’ as one of the biggest barriers to
(e.g. fibre/4G/Wi-     deployment of 5G technology for their organisation. Digital Catapult also found
  Fi) are seen as      that “manufacturers often incorrectly believe that their existing connectivity
          sufficient   capability already performs around 80% of what 5G is expected to deliver”.
                       (Barclays 2019) concluded that “a slower rate of network development and a
                       less vigorous customer response to the availability and services […] could be
                       because […] a higher proportion of customers remain happy with the service
                       they get from 4G and are slower to switch over.”
                       60% of respondents in 2016 listed ‘opportunities related to current generation
                       of mobile networks not yet fully exploited’ although that had dropped to 44%
                       by 2017 (Ericsson 2018).
                       A report by Analysys Mason into spend on LTE/5G private networks suggests
                       that the cost of deploying private LTE/5G private networks is high compared to
                       alternatives such as Wi-Fi. Thus, there is a risk that only relatively large
                       enterprises can afford to deploy them. Small and medium sized enterprises
                       (SMEs) and some other industrial users might therefore be excluded due to
                       cost concerns, as well as complexity. The same Analysys Mason report also
                       found “brownfield sites with a complex technology environment make
                       integration challenging: most industrial environments are brownfield sites; they
                       already have a plethora of networking technologies in place. Installing new,
                       additional technologies can be complex and costly”.


                       28
                            Demographic quotas were set for age, gender, and household income to ensure samples were
                       representative of the population of each market surveyed.
                       29
                            Australia, Finland, Germany, Japan, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, UK, and USA.
                       30
                            Energy and utilities, mining, manufacturing, public sector, healthcare, and transportation.

                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                       75
                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     GigaTag’s Interim Report (GigaTAG 2020) found that “the services people
                     have, or have available to them (i.e. superfast broadband), currently meet the
                     needs of the majority” they cited (Which? 2020) research that found that “73%
                     of broadband decision-makers said that their connection met their needs
                     during lockdown” and Ofcom (Ofcom 2020) research which found that “the
                     majority (82%) of people are satisfied with the speed of their service”.
                     28% of people surveyed by (Nokia 2020) say they “ want to make the most of
                     their existing network equipment before upgrading”.
                     (Nokia 2020b) found that in areas where 5G is available 44% of consumers
                     identified “4G service is good enough for me” as a barrier to use.
  Ecosystem not      (Barclays 2019), although optimistic about “early adopters”, highlighted that
     ready/ fully    “it’s the killer apps and the incredible new devices that bring everyone else on
       available     board”, stating that the networks are nothing without devices and applications
                     to run on them” although they did see “evidence of ample investment [in
                     these]”. In their model they stated that if “killer apps that encourage fast take-
                     up are slower to emerge” then there could be “a slower rate of network
                     development and a less vigorous customer response to the availability and
                     services”.
                     (Digital Catapult 2019) found that as part of interviewees concerns regarding
                     compatibility and interoperability with existing solutions, they had uncertainties
                     regarding “any other system solutions sitting on top of a network”.
                     (Ericsson 2018) found that in 2016, 53% of respondents chose ‘lack of a
                     mature ecosystem’ to be a key barrier to adoption of 5G. This had decreased
                     to 45% by 2017, although a second category, ‘lack of platforms to take full
                     advantage of 5G’ was also added in 2017 and 46% of respondents identified
                     that as a key barrier.
                     (Infosys 2019) found that 49% of respondents selected ‘device readiness’ as a
                     barrier to 5G adoption, and 51% selected ‘lack of technology maturity’. The
                     latter was identified as being especially relevant for UK respondents.
                     45% of (Nokia 2020b) respondents selected “do not own a 5G phone” as a
                     barrier to use in areas where 5G is available. The corresponding enterprise
                     survey identified one barrier as “Ecosystem availability - 5G currently exists in
                     pockets of availability. Some urban cities have 5G networks and a minority of
                     organisations have developed private 5G networks – but it is not yet the
                     network standard. As such, the most-cited barrier to 5G investment and
                     implementation was ‘availability of 5G-enabled products’, mentioned by 29%
                     of UK decision-makers” Nokia 2020c).


 Complexities of     (Digital Catapult 2019) found that “Interviewees were concerned about
 integrating new     compatibility and interoperability with existing solutions” and hence identified
5G solutions with    “Concerns around compatibility and interoperability of mobile networks when it
          existing   comes to integration into existing industrial systems” as one of five key
 technology and      challenges facing 5G adoption within manufacturing.
         systems
                     In 2017 ‘challenges of end-to-end implementation’ was added to the (Ericsson
                     2018) survey, and 69% of respondents selected it as a key barrier, making it
                     the third most common key barrier to 5G adoption.


                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                               76
                                                                                Realising the Benefits of 5G


                 (GigaTAG 2020) identified ‘hassle related to the switch – requirement for
                 engineer visits [for gigabit capable connection installation]’ as a barrier to
                 consumer adoption of gigabit-capable broadband.
                 (Which? 2020) found that “22% of broadband decision-makers didn’t want
                 someone to come to their home to install a new connection”.
                 In 2020, ‘integrating with existing technology’ was the most common challenge
                 to IoT deployment identified in GSMAi’s survey (GSMAi 2020b) having been
                 selected by 53% of enterprises. It was also one of the top three challenges
                 identified in the two years prior.
                 43% of (Infosys 2019) respondents identified ‘integration with existing network
                 and systems’ as a challenge to deployment.
      Cultural   “Cultural barriers to working with companies in different sectors such as
 resistance to   telecommunications, as well as start-ups” was identified as one of five key
       change    challenges in manufacturing in Digital Catapult’s study (Digital Catapult 2019).
                 (Ericsson 2018) found that in 2016 49% of respondents felt that ‘senior
                 stakeholder buy-in/concerns’ was a key barrier to 5G adoption. By 2017 that
                 number had increased to 54%.
                 In 2020, 40% of enterprises identified ‘employee/internal resistance’ as a
                 challenge to IoT deployment (GSMAi 2020b).


      Security   Another one of Digital Catapult’s five key challenges for manufacturing was
   concerns /    the “need for security” stating that “manufacturers want control over the
moving data to   security of their connectivity and data, as well as the connectivity itself, to
     the cloud   assess the quality of service. They have concerns about connecting
                 production lines to external stakeholders without expertise in their sector”.
                 Particular challenges include “no clear ownership of risk, limited control or
                 visibility of future changes, potential for giving part of their capabilities away to
                 a third party, and concerns over long term service level agreements (SLAs)”.
                 This was further evidence by c.30% of survey respondents listing ‘concerns
                 over security’ as one of the biggest barriers to deployment of 5G technology
                 for their organisation (Digital Catapult 2019).
                 In 2017, the most common key barrier (Ericsson 2018) identified was
                 ‘concerns around data security and privacy’ which was selected by 79% of
                 respondents, up from 60% in 2016.
                 ‘Data security’ was the most commonly cited barrier in Infosys’ survey (Infosys
                 2019) with 59% of respondents identifying it as an adoption barrier to 5G, this
                 was consistent across regions.
                 ‘Security and data privacy concerns’ was identified by enterprises as one of
                 the top three challenges to IoT deployment in 2018, 2019 and 2020, with 50%
                 of enterprises selecting it in 2020 (GSMAi 2020b).
                 34% of enterprise respondents in (Nokia 2020c) were “concerned about the
                 security of 5G” rising to 40% in healthcare and 43% in the mining industry. In
                 turn, 22% cited security risks related to 5G as a primary barrier to its
                 implementation.




                 Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 77
                                                                                Realising the Benefits of 5G


       Lack of      Digital Catapult’s study also identified “lack of demonstrable cost-efficiency
business case /     and return on investment” as one of five key challenges, stating that “a clear
 understanding      ROI and business case is crucial to the introduction of 5G in manufacturing,
        of ROI      according to our interviews”. More than 70% of survey respondents listed ‘lack
                    of understanding of ROI and value’ as one of the biggest barriers to
                    deployment of 5G technology for their organisation, agreeing with this finding
                    (Digital Catapult 2019).
                    (Barclays 2019) found that “nearly half of companies reported that they didn’t
                    expect to see an increase in business revenues from the advent of 5G”, and in
                    particular “only 7% of managers in the Healthcare industry are expecting a
                    significant increase in revenue compared to the highest reported figure of 26%
                    of Logistics businesses.”
                    (Cerre 2019) highlighted a need to reduce market uncertainty in order to
                    stimulate investment.


                    (GigaTAG 2020) found that “a number of businesses perceive there to be little
                    current benefit in taking up gigabit capable technologies – with a third of
                    respondents to the CBI Tech Tracker Survey stating that they have no current
                    plans to invest in gigabit-capable technologies”. The report also states that “of
                    businesses that had not already adopted gigabit-capable technologies, almost
                    one-in-five (19%) didn’t see the Return on Investment of gigabit-capable
                    technologies.”
                    In 2020 27% of respondents identified ‘unclear ROI’ as a challenge to IoT
                    deployment (GSMAi 2020b).
                    (Nokia 2020) stated that “demonstrating ROI will be key to success”.


  Concern over      The percentage of respondents in (Ericsson 2018) who identified ‘lack of
upfront (capital)   budget/investment’ as a key barrier to 5G adoption increased from 60% in
           costs    2016 to 61% in 2017.
                    ‘Cost of implementation’ has been identified as one of the top three challenges
                    for IoT deployment among enterprises for 2018, 2019 and 2020, with 47% of
                    respondents selecting it in 2020 (GSMAi 2020b).
                    50% of (Infosys 2019) survey respondents indicated ‘investment involved’ was
                    an adoption barrier to 5G.
                    30% of consumers in areas where 5G is available cite “5G phones are too
                    expensive” as a barrier to use (Nokia 2020b).
                    In the UK 17% of enterprises cited “the costs are too high” as a barrier to 5G
                    investment (Nokia 2020c).




                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                              78
                                                                                Realising the Benefits of 5G


          Lack of    Nearly 60% of Digital Catapult’s survey respondents listed cost as one of the
understanding of     biggest barriers to deployment of 5G technology for their organisation (Digital
     total cost of   Catapult 2019).
ownership (TCO)
                     38% of consumers in areas where 5G is available said that “5G data plans are
  / concern over
                     too expensive” (Nokia 2020b).
  ongoing costs/
    monthly data
            costs




                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                             79
                                                           Realising the Benefits of 5G



6        Modelling the adoption and benefits of
         5G

6.1      Overview
This section describes our approach to modelling 5G adoption in the UK and
estimating the economic, environmental, and social benefits. The modelling
can be broken down into three components:
•     Modelling UK-wide adoption and market barriers and modelling of public
      network roll-out
•     Disaggregating UK-wide adoption projections for the UK regions, Scotland,
      Wales and Northern Ireland, and also for rural and urban areas of each
      region and country
•     Estimating economic, environmental, and social benefits
A diagram showing simplified linkages between these components is
presented in Figure 6-1. It shows how outputs of these components are used
as inputs by other components. The diagram also shows the key assumptions
underpinning each stage of modelling.
Figure 6-1 Model logic diagram




Source: Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.

6.2      Adoption and barriers model
We have considered the adoption of 5G applications, modelled as the take-up
of each group of use cases by each consumer group, over a 15-year period
(2020–35). The resulting adoption curves are expressed as a percentage of


Cambridge Econometrics                                                             80
                                                                        Realising the Benefits of 5G


the addressable market. This section outlines the approach taken to model
adoption curves, taking into account associated barriers for 5G applications.


Using 5G enablement curves to quantify demand for 5G
Published data on ‘5G enablement’ from GSMA was used as a starting point
in developing these adoption curves. 5G enablement represents the
progressive impact of 5G on the economy, over a 15-year timescale (i.e.
2020–35), by consumer group and types of 5G application. The GSMA
modelled these benefits as starting from 2020 and achieving 100% realisation
by 2035. With this information as a starting point, taking into account the
evidence base analysed in this study along with Analysys Mason’s own insight
and experience, we refined these into a UK-specific set of 5G enablement
curves, mapped to our consumer groups and 5G applications definitions.

The GSMA report (GSMA 2018) provides unweighted forecasts for 5G
adoption or enablement, by 5G feature, for a number of country categories.
The GSMA’s curves were derived based on industry research, 4G adoption,
and inputs from a panel of experts. The experts were asked their views on
how quickly different 5G use cases might be adopted, in different world
regions. Key threshold years (the year the 5G use case will be initially
deployed, and the year the use case will reach maturity) were defined for
different types of market (advanced adopters, early adopters, late adopters).
Whilst the UK was not specifically modelled, we envisage it would fall into the
‘early adopter Europe’ category defined by the GSMA.

The figures below show a selection of the GSMA’s forecasts and underlying
enablement assumptions.

Table 6-1.: Example of 5G enablement assumptions – Early Adopters Europe (retained
for the UK)
                 2020


                         2021


                                2022


                                       2023


                                               2024


                                                      2025


                                                             2026


                                                                     2027


                                                                             2028


                                                                                     2029


                                                                                             2030




 High-speed       0%      0%     1%     1%      3%     6%    11%    19%      31%     45%     60%
 Broadband
 in the Home
 High-speed       0%      1%     2%     3%      5%     9%    15%    23%      35%     48%     61%
 Broadband
 in the Office
 Ultra-Low        0%      0%     0%     0%      1%     2%     3%      6%     11%     18%     29%
 Cost
 Networks in
 Rural Areas
 Dynamic Hot      0%      1%     2%     3%      5%     9%    15%    23%      35%     48%     61%
 Spots
Note: 0% in this table represents negligible/no adoption of the respective 5G use case.
Source: Analysys Mason.



Cambridge Econometrics                                                                          81
                                                                        Realising the Benefits of 5G


Translating barrier impact into enablement scenarios
We model demand-side barriers as having an impact on both the timing (i.e. a
delay in adoption starting) and rate of adoption (i.e. a slower adoption over
time) 31. We have assessed for each consumer group how barriers for specific
5G applications will impact adoption. A summary of our findings for the AR/VR
5G application in the Public services consumer group is presented in the table
below:


Table 6-2.: Barrier assessment overall rating – AR/VR illustration

 Barriers to adoption                  Delay to           Impact on rate     Relevance of
                                       adoption           of adoption        barrier
 Existing technologies (e.g.
                                               3                 4                  6%
 fibre/4G/Wi-Fi) seen as sufficient
 Lack of business case /
                                               4                 3                  17%
 understanding of ROI
 Concern over upfront (capital)
                                              0                  0                  0%
 costs
 Lack of understanding of total cost
 of ownership (TCO) /
                                               2                 2                  6%
 concern over ongoing
 costs/monthly data costs
 Cultural resistance to change                 2                 2                  6%
 Ecosystem not ready / fully
                                               3                 4                  17%
 available
 Security concerns / moving data to
                                               3                 3                  17%
 the cloud
 Lack of understanding of 5G and
                                               3                 4                  28%
 the benefits using 5G offers
 Complexities of integrating with
                                               1                 2                  6%
 existing technology and systems
 Overall rating                                4                 3                 100%
                                        = MAX [Delay      = Weighted Ave
                                         to adoption]     [Rate of adoption x Relevance]
 Overall scenario                      Mid-term:          Slow adoption
                                       4 years delay     rate
Note: Delay to adoption is the number of years (from 2021) the start of adoption is delayed by.
        Impact on rate of adoption sets the curve of adoption to one of four options (limited
        early adoption, slow adoption, medium adoption, rapid adoption. Relevance is a
        measure of the relative economic impact of 5G applications in each consumer group.
Source: Analysys Mason.


Modelling scale of adoption
As discussed, the 5G enablement forecasts provided by GSMA do not provide
an indication of the scale of adoption (in terms of number of firms for example)
when 100% benefits are achieved. Equally, it is not immediately obvious what
10%, 20% or 50% enablement achievement translates to in terms of scale and


31 Please see standalone Appendix B for a detailed explanation on the barrier analysis..



Cambridge Econometrics                                                                          82
                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G


intensity of adoption of 5G applications. As such, a secondary piece of
analysis has been conducted to provide scenarios on the asymptotic (or ‘end-
point’) 5G adoption (at a firm level) to accompany the enablement curves
provided.
The adoption curves reflect adoption relative to a notional maturity level for 5G
adoption in the UK, which can be thought about as an 'addressable market'; at
100% adoption, all firms that are susceptible to adopt 5G would have done so.
As such, we have developed a view on what this addressable market could
be, based on adoption trends for internet and advanced technologies at
different degrees of maturity (Eurostat 2020), (ONS 2018).
•     an optimistic view of 5G would treat it as a general-purpose technology
      that could be adopted by nearly all firms, like the internet is currently
•     a more nuanced view would be to look at advanced digital technologies
      including IoT, cloud services and 'big data', for which adoption statistics
      are available at UK and EU level
The scale of adoption can be expressed as % of firms by size class, and by
number of employees in these firms. We have presented two addressable
market scenarios by consumer group 32, based on the adoption of selected
reference technologies (i.e. the Internet and IoT, cloud and big data).
The enablement curves outputs from the barrier analysis (as presented in the
previous subsection) modulate adoption over time as a % of this addressable
market. This is done by multiplying the total addressable market, in terms of
number of employees, by the % adoption in each year on the adoption curve.


Translating addressable market to adoption curves
The cumulative benefit realised at the end of the forecast period is distributed
over years in the model by the enablement curves. The addressable market
gives a measure of the number of firms realising this benefit. To formulate
scale of adoption scenarios, long-run addressable market scenarios have
been applied multiplicatively to the enablement curve outputs for the two
barrier analysis cases (i.e. Optimistic case and Central case). Where the trend
for the 5G application with the highest adoption is used to represent scaling of
the addressable market at the consumer group level.


6.3      Disaggregating adoption
The model carries out further calculations to breakdown 5G adoption
projections by UK region, country and rural/urban area. This is achieved
based on assumptions around the sub-national roll-out of a public 5G network
and concurrent roll-out of private networks.


Roll-out modelling

32 Mapping of SIC/NACE codes to Consumer Groups has been included in the

analysis (See standalone Appendix D)


Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 83
                                                                                 Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    The sub-national profile of 5G adoption will depend, in part, of the availability
                    of a local 5G network connection. This 5G network connection could either be
                    provided by a public 5G network, or a private network licensed to an individual
                    enterprise.
  Public roll-out   We expect the majority of 5G adoption will be using a public 5G network. At
                    present, the UK’s public 5G network has been rolled out in a small number of
                    urban centres. We assume the roll-out of a public 5G network will continue to
                    follow population density, with higher population density areas receiving 5G
                    coverage sooner than lower population density areas.
                    The starting assumption used in modelling of 5G roll-out are the UK-wide 5G
                    roll-out projections obtained from Huawei and Oxford Economics study (2019).
                    These projections (in terms of % of UK population living in areas covered by
                    5G) are used to calculate the increases in population living in areas with 5G
                    coverage in each year.
                    For each year, the increase in population living in areas covered by 5G is
                    allocated to the sub-regions with the greatest population density which have
                    not yet been covered by public 5G networks. The coverage of these
                    sub-regions is projected to increase from 0% to 100% of the regions’
                    population. Therefore, in any given year, the UK-wide increase in population
                    living in areas covered by 5G will be identical to the combined population of
                    sub-regions which are projected to have 5G rolled out in the same year 33.
                    This step relies on high-resolution sub-regional data on population, population
                    density and urban/rural classification:
                           •     English and Welsh Middle-Layer Super Output Areas;
                           •     Scottish Intermediate Zones;
                           •     Northern Ireland’s Local Authority Districts.
                    These data are for 2019 or 2020. It is assumed that the population density will
                    remain the same throughout the roll-out modelling period.
                    The output of roll-out modelling is a table assigning the forecasted year during
                    which 5G will be rolled out in each sub-region. This output is used as
                    intermediate input to calculation of public network adoption described in
                    sections below.
Private networks    Private networks have been identified as a key feature of 5G for certain types
                    of industrial user. We thus expect a proportion of 5G adopters to use private
                    networks, rather than public networks. However, the extent to which private
                    networks will be utilised in future is highly uncertain, especially as at present
                    only a handful of 5G private networks have been set-up in the UK.
                    Given the degree of uncertainty of the scale of future private network use, we
                    have taken a relatively simple approach to incorporating private network
                    assumptions into our model. We allow the user of the model to input their own
                    assumptions around the following variables:
                    •      The percentage of total 5G adoption among largest firms which uses
                           private networks



                    33
                         Subject to small difference due to rounding.

                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                               84
                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


•      The consumer groups that will use private networks
We assume that only the largest firms with employment of 250 and more will
use private networks. As private networks will not rely on public 5G
infrastructure, their availability is independent of the roll-out of public networks.
Therefore, adoption of private networks by region or country is solely driven by
the presence of the largest firms (250 or more employees) in certain sectors
which are assumed to rely on private networks.
Roll-out and adoption of private networks are modelled simultaneously (since
all firms which roll out private 5G networks will also be adopting 5G at the
same time). To obtain the total UK-wide roll-out and adoption of private
networks, the UK-wide adoption curves are multiplied by the addressable
market assumptions and by the assumed share of private networks in 5G
adoption across the largest firms.
In the next step, UK-wide adoption is distributed across regions and countries
based on the presence of the largest firms in each consumer group which is
assumed to rely on private networks. In any given year, the roll-out and
adoption in a particular region or country are assumed to be proportional to
the region or country’s share in population of these largest firms which have
not yet adopted public or private 5G.
The output of private network roll-out and adoption modelling is a number of
employees working in firms which have adopted private networks.


Disaggregating adoption based on roll-out
Based on the expected path of public network roll-out, the model calculates
the proportion of employment in firms which have access to a public 5G
network in each region 34. The UK-wide adoption curves are then
disaggregated such that adoption via public route only occurs in firms with
access to a public network.
The process is iterated for each year up to 2035, so that for each region the
employment in firms which have access to a public 5G network and have not
yet adopted is calculated. UK-wide adoption of public networks is then
allocated across these regions based on their share in the total UK-wide pool
of employment in firms which have access to a public 5G network.
Each adoption curve, for a given consumer group and firm size, is
disaggregated in this way. For private networks, adoption can take place in
areas which are not yet covered by public 5G. Therefore, the UK-wide
adoption of private networks is allocated across regions based on their share
in the total pool of employment in the largest firms (250+ employees).
The model then aggregates adoption across consumer groups and firm sizes
to calculate total annual adoption by region or country and rural/urban area.
Annual adoption in each region or country is thus determined by:
•      5G infrastructure roll-out (public networks only)
•      The composition of the region in terms of consumer groups

34
     Regions available include English regions, countries (Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland) and rural/urban
areas within these.

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                     85
                                                                                 Realising the Benefits of 5G


•      The composition in the region in terms of firm size
The implicit assumption underpinning regional 5G adoption disaggregation
results is that the composition of consumer groups across regions will remain
the same throughout the modelling period.
The output of the public network adoption modelling is a share of employment
working in firms which have adopted 5G, for each region or country and
consumer group.

6.4         Economic benefits modelling
The overall approach to the economic modelling can be categorised in three
key stages. The model first estimates total economy impacts. The relative
impacts across consumer groups are then estimated. Lastly, the sub-national
impacts are estimated based on the projected sub-national distribution of 5G
adoption.
The economic impact of 5G adoption is modelled as an annual GVA growth
uplift over an economic baseline. It is constructed from economic forecasts
generated by multisectoral dynamic modelling (CE’s MDM UK model). The
baseline is built up from a set of two-digit SIC code GVA forecasts mapped to
the consumer groups. It is designed to provide a no-5G adoption
counterfactual 35.
We follow GSMA (2019) in modelling the size of the UK-wide annual GVA
growth uplift as determined by two factors: the path of 5G adoption; and an
assumption of the maximum annual growth rate uplift as an impact of 5G
adoption. We take a scenario-driven approach to modelling these factors, to
account for the uncertainty around the future adoption and impact of 5G,
which in turn is due to the lack of empirical evidence to date on which to hang
a reliable forecast. The scenarios are set out in Section 7.
The model calculates relative impacts (i.e. the share of total GVA uplift that is
attributable to each consumer group) based on three factors:
       1. Adoption – If a consumer group adopts 5G faster and generally if 5G is
          more pervasive in a consumer group, then it will have a greater share
          of the total economic impacts attributed to it (all other things equal).
       2. 5G sensitivity – The model includes the option for certain consumer
          groups are assumed to be more sensitive to 5G impacts. This is based
          on the digital intensity of the consumer groups, which reflects the
          extent to which a consumer group consumes digital intermediate inputs
          and invests in digital assets.
       3. Economic size of consumer group – If a consumer group is larger in
          size (in terms of GVA), then it will have a greater share of the total
          economic impacts attributed to it (all other things equal).
Notably, the proportional uplift in GVA growth is determined by adoption and
5G sensitivity alone. The rationale for this is firstly that 5G has the potential to

35
     MDM treats technology as endogenous, forecasting incremental improvements in technology based on
historical trends. It does not capture transformational changes to technology. As such, to construct the no-
5G baseline we calibrate the MDM forecast to our incremental improvement 5G scenario, which is
described in more detail in the next chapter.

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                    86
                                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


lift GVA growth, and that the potential GVA uplift is shaped by the consumer
group’s relationship with digital technology. Potential uplift is adjusted so that
the consumer groups which use existing digital technology most intensively
stand to experience the most proportional gains from 5G. Specifically, this
process involves constructing statistical weights which can be used to
augment GVA uplift. The calculations are shown below, where 𝑖𝑖 is the
consumer group, 𝜔𝜔 is the statistical weight, 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 is gross fixed capital
formation, 𝑍𝑍 is intermediate demand (i.e. demand for supplies/support
services) and ∆𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 is the change in GVA.
                                   𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖,𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑            𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖,𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
                              ⎧0.5                             + 0.5                        , if digital total
                              ⎪     𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡                𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡
                              ⎪       𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖,𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
                       𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖 =                                    , if digital investment
                              ⎨        𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡
                              ⎪
                              ⎪         𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖,𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
                                                             ,        if digital demand
                              ⎩          𝑍𝑍𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡


                                                                            ∑𝑖𝑖 ∆𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
                             ∆𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖 = 𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖 ∆𝐺𝐺𝑉𝑉𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ×
                                                                           ∑𝑖𝑖 𝜔𝜔𝑖𝑖 ∆𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖,𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
This manipulation is muted under the “Digital balanced” scenario assumption.
Next, adoption shapes the extent to which the potential gains from 5G are
realised. Consumer groups which adopt 5G most rapidly are able to
accelerate GVA growth earlier and by a greater extent. Total addressable
market assumptions also affect the GVA uplift experienced in the ADT
scenario (under GPT total addressable market is proportionate across all
consumer groups).
Lastly, the GVA uplift is applied to the respective activities within each
consumer group. For a given GVA growth uplift, consumer groups which
include a larger amount of economic activities (such as Smart Urban)
therefore generate larger GVA benefits.




Sub-national economic impacts are calculated using the intermediate outputs
from the adoption disaggregation module described in Section 6.3. The
starting point in disaggregating economic benefits by region or country is the
region or country’s share in total UK employment working in firms which have
adopted 5G, for each consumer group.
In the next step these shares are converted using sub-national GVA data to
sub-national shares in total UK GVA attributable to employment working in
firms which adopted 5G. This conversion allows the model to account for sub-
national differences in GVA per employee. Therefore, the estimated economic
impact in region A for any given consumer group is calculated as:
𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝐴𝐴
                        = 𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈-𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
                           𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 𝐴𝐴′ 𝑠𝑠 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑤𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖ℎ 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 5𝐺𝐺
                        ∗
                             𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈-𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤𝑤 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑤𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖ℎ 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 5𝐺𝐺


Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                         87
                                                           Realising the Benefits of 5G


A similar approach is used to calculate sub-national impacts of private
networks adoption. These impacts are assumed to be proportional to
employment working in firms which adopted private 5G networks, expressed
as a share of total employment working in firms which adopted 5G.

6.5      Environmental benefits modelling
Environmental benefits are modelled as additional emissions avoided due to
adoption of 5G-enabled over 4G for a range of use cases. The avoided
emissions factors are obtained from GSMA (2019), which estimated avoided
emissions factors from various mobile network enabled technologies in 2018.
Avoided emissions factors represent a net impact on emissions, considering
the avoided emissions, as well as the emissions associated with the use of
mobile-technology-enabled alternative. The additional avoided emissions from
using 5G are calculated by applying additionality factors used in Accenture
(2019) to conduct a similar exercise for Canada.
These avoided emissions factors cover a range of IoT machine to machine
use cases and smartphone use cases. The way in which 5G use leads to
emissions savings depends on the type of use case:
•     IoT machine to machine use cases such as those in buildings, transport,
      manufacturing, and the energy sector, will enable emissions savings
      through improved efficiency.
•     In addition, smartphone 5G use cases will enable emissions savings
      through behavioural changes (e.g. more online shopping, use of transport
      apps increased public transport use, etc,).
For each of the use cases for which avoided emissions factor data are
available, the model calculates avoided emissions by projecting the number of
5G connections linked to that use case and applying the avoided emissions
factor.
The number of IoT machine to machine connections in the UK is estimated by
taking the GSMA-estimated number of connections in Europe in 2018 and
scaling it using a ratio of UK to European GVA in each consumer group. The
number of devices is then projected up to 2035 assuming the same growth
rate as the baseline economic growth projections.
The number of smartphone connections linked to the use cases derived from
GSMA (2019) is projected forward by extrapolating Analysys Mason’s in-
house projections on the number of smartphones, or using baseline economic
growth projections (IoT machine to machine use cases).
We calculate avoided emissions under the assumption of additionality of 5G
compared to its predecessors. This approach follows Accenture (2019), in
which 5G multipliers were assumed to result in additional avoided emissions
enabled by 5G-enabled features. As in the Accenture study, we set the upper
case for 5G additionality at 90% improvement, and the lower case at a 40%
improvement. Therefore, the estimated impacts can be interpreted as the
incremental reduction in emissions brought by 5G-enabled features of various
mobile network technologies.
It is worth noting that we have not explicitly modelled the environmental impact
of increased economic activity resulting from 5G adoption. It is reasonable to

Cambridge Econometrics                                                             88
                                                                                                 Realising the Benefits of 5G


expect that higher economic output stimulated by 5G could increase
emissions. To model this type of effect would require emissions estimates
directly linked to economic impact estimates, which we do not attempt to
model here.



6.6         Social benefits modelling
Our literature review of the social impacts of 5G found numerous potential
benefits. However, the nature of many social impacts (health, wellbeing,
quality of life etc.) make them difficult to quantify, with only a small number of
bottom-up literature attempting to do so for specific use cases of interest.

For this reason, we focus on quantifying the social benefits for only a specific
use case – time savings from adoption of IoT technologies by individual
consumers. This was the use case for which the most robust evidence was
available, considering factors including availability of empirical data and
evidence of additionality. We anticipate that as more data become available in
future, it will be feasible to quantify the social benefits of other use cases
following a similar approach.

The calculation of UK-wide time savings due to adoption of 5G-enabled IoT
technologies is based on various parameters. The following formula was used
to estimate the annual time savings (in hours):

 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 (ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜)
                          = 5𝐺𝐺 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 ∗ 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟
                          ∗ 5𝐺𝐺 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 ∗
                          ∗ 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎
                          ∗ 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝

The 5G adoption rate is taken from the adoption and barriers model as an
adoption curve for ‘High-speed broadband into homes and offices’ consumer
group, which is assessed to best represent the adoption of personal and
household 5G IoT devices. The assumption on the IoT time savings rate
(17%) is taken from McKinsey study (2015). To reflect 5G additionality in the
estimate, only 5% of these time savings from IoT applications are attributed to
5G. This additionality factor is based on the lower-end parameter used in the
European Commission (2016) study. Other parameters used in the calculation
include the average time spent on household and family care per adult in the
UK (from Eurostat) and UK adult population projections (from the ONS).

To obtain the monetary value of time saved, the estimated annual time
savings in hours are multiplied by the estimated value of time obtained from
the economic literature. The estimate was sourced from a study on the
Willingness to Pay (WTP) for leisure traded against unpaid work (Verbooy, et
al. 2018). After applying currency conversion and inflation adjustment, this
value stood at £8.10 per hour (2018 prices).
The values of estimated social impacts produced by the model (time saved
and its value) are directly proportional to the values of parameters outlined in
the equation above. Therefore, any uncertainty around the value of these
Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                         89
                                                           Realising the Benefits of 5G


parameters leads to a directly proportional degree of uncertainty around the
estimated impacts. For example, the 5G additionality parameter, at 5%, is
taken as a lower end estimate from the European Commission study (based
on the enhanced real-time capabilities and connectivity to the cloud offered by
5G wearable devices). However, the potential additionality of 5G to home and
consumer could be as high as 10%, if based on a parameter from the same
study (additionality of enhanced 5G-enabled real-time data exchange
capabilities of smart meters). This means that the estimated time savings and
their value could double if the alternative value of 5G additionality parameter
was used.
Similarly, alternative sources estimate the time saving rate of personal and
household IoT devices at 20% (AT Kearney 2016). Use of this rate (instead of
the assumed 17%) would increase the estimated time savings and their value
by approximately 9%. This demonstrates a large degree of uncertainty in the
estimated social impacts.



6.7      Challenges and limitations
It is important to note that modelling future impacts of 5G adoption is a
challenging exercise due to the complexity of the task and the high level of
uncertainty, in part due to a lack of empirical evidence. Compared to previous
mobile broadband standards, 5G is supposed to enable a wider range of use
cases and applications. However, 5G is a relatively new technology that is
only just beginning to be rolled out in the UK and around the world. This
means there are very few empirical data on the roll out, adoption and
application of 5G. The absence of empirical data on how 5G is being used and
by whom, and the scale and nature of benefits associated with that makes it
difficult, if not impossible, to populate the model with data and parameters
based on real world experience.
Existing studies have attempted to estimate the overall impact or benefit of
5G. However, faced with the same data limitations, these studies all provide
ex ante estimates which either rely on assumptions about the nature and scale
of the adoption of 5G and the benefits it brings; or draw on the empirical
evidence on the evolution and impact of previous technologies, such as 4G, to
approximate or make assumptions about how 5G will be adopted and the
benefits it will bring.
Both approaches have limitations. Studies based on the impacts of previous
technologies can use robust estimates of these impacts but are restricted by
the assumption that 5G is comparable to previous technologies. Studies which
forecast the impact of 5G based purely on expert assessment can assume
that the impact of 5G will be more transformative, but such forecasts are
highly subjective. The trade-off between the extent to which these studies are
grounded in empirical data and the extent to which they consider the specifics
of 5G reflects the limited evidence base – a challenge we are also faced with.
Without sufficient data to estimate our own model relationships, we will have
to rely on estimates and assumptions from these studies to develop the model
parameters.
A further challenge of identifying the benefits of 5G is additionality –
determining the extent to which each benefit can be attributed to 5G. This is
Cambridge Econometrics                                                             90
                                                             Realising the Benefits of 5G


difficult because many of the 5G use cases are also at least partly functional
with 4G or other internet technologies – making the benefit from 5G
incremental and hard to isolate. Backward-looking studies, such as those
estimating the impacts of earlier technologies, can overcome the additionality
problem through well designed identification strategies. Forward-looking
studies do not have this luxury. Some studies attempt to address additionality
by focusing only on use cases for which 5G is critical, while others apply an
estimate of the degree of additionality, to scale down their impact estimates.
Many studies make no attempt to address additionality.
We aim to address the additionality problem as far as possible by utilising
estimates of earlier technology impacts, available estimates of additionality
factors, and a scenario-driven approach. Nevertheless, some results from the
model will need to be carefully interpreted with respect to their degree of
additionality based on our own knowledge of the use cases and the extent to
which they are enabled by 5G.
Considering the challenges that we have set out, the model has been
designed to break down the distribution of the benefits across consumer
groups, households and firms, and geographical areas. In doing this, the
model meets fills an evidence gap that is important for policymakers to
address. It also allows us to ground the model in data and assumptions
around relatively impacts that we can be more confident about. The scale of
the impacts of 5G are highly uncertain, but the likely relative impacts of 5G will
be driven, to some extent, by the profile of 5G adoption among consumer
groups and geographical areas.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                               91
                                                                Realising the Benefits of 5G



7        Scenario descriptions

This chapter describes the scenarios for 5G adoption and impact that we have
developed and for which model results are presented in this report. Note that a
key feature of the model is that the user can build their own scenarios by
varying many of the model parameters. The scenarios we present have been
constructed based on our own assessment of the potential nature of 5G
adoption and impact based on the literature, evidence captured in this study
and our own analysis.


7.1      5G adoption and impact scenarios
We present results for two adoption and impact scenarios:

 •    an optimistic view of 5G would treat it as a general-purpose technology
      (GPT) that could be adopted very pervasively across a wide range of
      economic activities, like the internet is currently;

 •    a more nuanced view would be to look at advanced digital technologies
      (ADT) including IoT, cloud services and 'big data', for which adoption
      statistics are available at UK and EU level.

For each of these scenarios we have developed addressable market and GVA
uplift assumptions. The addressable market assumptions are based
on analysis of adoption trends for internet and advanced technologies at
different degrees of maturity. These scenarios are described in Table 7.1
below:

Table 7-1: Addressable market scenarios

                                 Long-term 5G adoption -        Adoption scale asymptote
 Scenarios                       technology reference           (2035)

 Scenario 1:                     Similar to the adoption of     70% of all firms, with most
 5G as a ubiquitous / General    mobile internet by firms for   non-adopter firms likely to be
 Purpose technology              business purposes              micro/small enterprises.


 Scenario 2:                     5G follows IoT and Cloud       60-75% of medium to large
 5G as an advanced digital       adoption trends                firms (50+ employees)
 technology                                                     30-35% for smaller firms (10+
                                                                employees). Adoption varies
                                                                across consumer groups.



Alongside the assumptions of addressable market, GVA uplift assumptions
have been developed for each of the GPT and ADT scenarios. The GVA uplift
scenarios were informed by a focussed review of evidence relating to 5G,
incremental improvements in mobile internet (or related technologies) and
general purpose technology. Due to sensitivity in the scoped evidence (and
incomplete information regarding underpinning assumptions), a degree of
judgement was necessary to determine the adopted GVA uplift assumptions.

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                  92
                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


For the GPT scenario, GSMA (2018) paper’s assessment of a maximum
potential uplift of economic growth stemming from 5G (0.28 pp) was used as
an impact ceiling in the model. This finding was also echoed by other
literature. CIE (2014) estimated ex-post that the productivity impacts of mobile
broadband sector as a whole was 0.28 pp. Lastly, the median impact across
the collated range of GPT studies roughly equalled 0.28 pp (but is very
sensitive to the selection and organisation of study findings).
For the advanced digital technology scenario, we drew on existing studies
which include high/low impact estimates of 5G (or of related technology). This
includes Productivity Commission (2004) and, notably, Australian Government
(2018) which indicates that the GVA uplift from a more incremental type of
improvement in mobile technology is around four times lower than in the GPT
scenario (although we adopt different assumptions about GVA uplift intensity
and timing). The median findings of papers which estimate impacts of
incremental changes in mobile technology were also used to inform the
estimate. The median growth uplift of incremental technological change was
also found to be around 4-times lower than that of GPT. Hence, for this
scenario we set the maximum GVA uplift to 0.07pp.



7.2          Market barrier assumptions
As explained in the previous chapter, the 5G adoption curves in our model can
be varied across different demand-side market barrier assumptions. Demand-
side barriers could have an impact on both the timing (i.e. a delay in adoption
starting) and rate of adoption (i.e. a slower adoption over time). We model
impacts under each of the two adoption and impact scenarios for two separate
sets of market barrier assumptions:

        1. Central case: For each consumer group we have assessed the extent
           to which market barriers are expected to impact 5G adoption over the
           modelling period. From this assessment, which draws on evidence
           from literature and evidence gathered during this study, the delay to
           adoption and rate of adoption ratings have been set by Analysys
           Mason.

        2. Low case: In this case all barriers that could be addressed through
           proactive Government policies 36 are addressed, barring those we
           expect to be largely dependent on market choices, i.e. ‘Cultural
           resistance to change’ and ‘Existing technologies are seen as
           sufficient’. Additionally, we have included the impact of a barrier which
           may be partially addressed through the market and partially addressed
           through government initiatives, i.e. ‘Ecosystem not ready’.

These projections have been calibrated by referencing ‘digital readiness
assessment’ outputs (see Figure 4-6). Relative timeline of adoption for various
consumer groups was sense-checked as well as the timeliness of adoption
forecasts at a 5G application level. For example:

36
     It is noted that proactive industrial policies might also address some of the barriers cited e.g. by
proactively addressing the lack of understanding over 5G benefits.

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                         93
                                                              Realising the Benefits of 5G




      •   Earlier adoption of 5G is driven by eMBB supported use cases, (e.g.
          FWA and MBB for homes and offices, AR/VR) and further enabled
          through edge-cloud capabilities
      •   Emerging adoption is expected to be driven initially by use of 5G for
          IoT use cases as well as automation/ robotics thereafter
      •   Lagging adoption is expected for those consumer groups and use
          cases dependent on advanced technology adoption or affected by
          supply-side barriers such as coverage



7.3       Comparing results across scenarios
The results discussed in the following chapter are based on, in effect, the
impacts of 5G adoption under four scenarios: two scenarios of potential
adoption and impact each modelled with two sets of market barrier
assumptions.

The model results under the central market barriers case are presented as our
headline projections of 5G impact in the GPT and ADT scenarios, because
these results represent our assessment of the likely impact of market barriers
on each consumer group. Modelling the GPT and ADT scenario under low
market barrier assumptions is used to estimate the potential value of removing
all demand-side market barriers. This demonstrates how the model can be
used to assess the potential value of removing market barriers under different
adoption scenarios. Table 7-2. below illustrates how the model is used to
project the impact of removing market barriers:

Table 7-2.: Model scenarios

                                     5G as a GPT         5G as an advanced digital
                                                                 technology

 Central market barriers      Scenario 1                Scenario 3
 assumption

 Low market barriers          Scenario 2                Scenario 4
 assumption
 Value of removing market     Scenario 2 - Scenario 1   Scenario 4 - Scenario 3
 barriers



While this report focuses on the potential gains from removing all demand-side
market barriers, policymakers working on solving specific market barriers will
be also be interested to model the marginal impact of removing such market
barriers while holding all other market barriers constant. It is hence important
to note that the model can be used to do this, both to model UK-wide impacts
and to model impacts within a given consumer group.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                94
                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G



                   8              Analysis of scenario results

                   8.1       General introduction
What determines    As a general rule, the modelling of economic impacts considered (and can be
      economic     explained by) the following dynamics and scenario features:
  impacts in the
                         1   Core uplift – The nature of change that will be induced by 5G in the
     5G model?
                             next 15 years is not fully understood and a range of hypotheses are
                             present in the literature. The core impact of 5G varies depending on
                             whether it is assumed to be a general purpose technology or whether it
                             is assumed to have more conservative impact potential (e.g. akin to
                             IoT or cloud computing).
                         2   Adoption – Adoption determines the extent to which potential
                             economic impacts are realised. Faster and greater adoption will lead to
                             greater economic impacts of 5G.
                         3   Barriers – Presence of market barriers affect adoption and, therefore,
                             economic impacts. This feature in particular highlights the role of policy
                             in facilitating the economic benefits of 5G.
                         4   Addressable market – The proportion of the total market which can
                             realistically be addressed by 5G will determine its economic impacts.
                             This is of particular interest when contrasting impacts across consumer
                             groups.
                         5   Baseline size of consumer groups – Some defined consumer groups
                             are very large in size, because they capture a large range of economic
                             activities and/or the UK economy has specialised in the sectors they
                             correspond to (e.g. finance and professional services). Larger sectors
                             have a greater impact in levels terms all other things equal, because of
                             their relative importance to the UK economy.
                   In the discussion of consumer-group impacts, we also consider the impact of
                   introducing digital intensity to model variation in marginal impact of 5G
                   adoption between consumer groups:
                         6   Digital intensity – Some defined consumer groups have a greater
                             digital element to their economic activity. A large share of their
                             investment may be made into digital-related capital, or a large share of
                             goods and services necessary to support their activities may be
                             demanded from digital-related sectors. In some scenarios, this is taken
                             into account and therefore affects the relative impacts across
                             consumer groups.


                   For sub-national impacts, three further variables influence the model results:
                         7   Public network roll-out – We model 5G roll-out as starting in high
                             population density area and gradually reaching lower population
                             density areas.




                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 95
                                                                                     Realising the Benefits of 5G


       8     Regional composition of consumer groups 37 – The types of
             consumer groups which exist in different UK geographies will affect the
             distribution of impacts across the UK.
       9     Spatial firm demographics – The firm demographics (i.e. composition
             of large and small firms) across UK geographies will affect the
             distribution of impacts across the UK.


UK baseline assessment
As a part of the modelling exercise, a baseline forecast for the UK economy
was required. This was principally 38 derived from Cambridge Econometrics’
Multisectoral Dynamic Model of the UK economy 39. This is shown in Figure
8-1.
The overall growth rate of the UK economy in the baseline is 1.9% pa over
2020-2035. Across consumer groups, it can be seen that Smart Urban and
Public Services are the largest in GVA terms in the model baseline.
Figure 8-1: Model baseline (UK GVA by consumer group)




Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3
        econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.



8.2          Economic impacts
This section presents the aggregate model results for the UK as a whole,
across all sectors and geographies. This provides a high-level assessment for
the potential benefits 5G could bring to the UK economy.


3737

38
     A fuller description of the process to estimate the baseline provided in the model description note..
39
     https://www.camecon.com/how/mdm-e3-model/

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                       96
                                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


5G technology is    In the general-purpose technology scenario, where adoption is widespread
     projected to   across consumer groups and firm sizes, the cumulative economic impact of
generate £41bn -    5G adoption over 2021-35 under the central market barriers case is projected
  £159bn in GVA     at £159bn, reaching an annual GVA benefit of £37bn in 2035. In the advanced
    over 2021-35    digital technology scenario, GVA benefits are smaller (£40.7bn cumulative
                    over 2021-35; £9.3bn in 2035), reflecting the more conservative scenario
                    assumptions (see Chapter 4). The trends in annual GVA impacts across these
                    two scenarios are shown in Figure 8-2.
                    When expressed in relative terms, this result implies that UK GVA across all
                    sectors of the economy is on aggregate 1.6% higher as a result of 5G under
                    the GPT scenario and 0.4% higher under the ADT scenario.
                    Figure 8-2. Aggregate GVA impacts of UK-wide 5G adoption (central market barriers
                    case), 2021-35

                                                 40                                                                  37.0

                                                 35
                       Annual GVA impact (£bn)




                                                 30
                                                 25
                                                 20
                                                 15                                       11.0
                                                                                                                      9.3
                                                 10
                                                 5                                         2.9

                                                 0
                                                      2020                2025            2030                       2035

                                                        General purpose technology   Advanced digital technology

                    Notes: Annual GVA impacts of 5G (£bn) are shown for the general purpose technology (GPT)
                            and advanced digital technology (ADT) scenario assumptions (central market barrier).
                    Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3
                            econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.

       Economic     The result above assumes a central case of market barriers to 5G adoption,
benefits could be   based on the outputs of the barrier assessment (see standalone Appendix B).
 extended by up     Under a more optimistic, low barrier scenario, impacts could be much higher.
   to £84bn over    Over 2021-35, it is projected that 5G benefits could be extended by a further
       2021-35 if   £84bn under the GPT scenario (£22bn under the ADT scenario) if efforts are
  market barriers   made to reduce barriers to adoption of 5G, highlighting the importance of
  are addressed     policy in realising 5G benefits. The annual additional benefits across general
                    purpose technology and advanced digital technology scenarios are shown in
                    Figure 8-3.




                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                  97
                                                                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    Figure 8-3. Additional GVA impacts of UK-wide 5G adoption from lower market barriers,
                    2021-35

                                                          14




                        Additional GVA impact (£2018bn)
                                                          12
                                                          10
                                                          8
                                                          6
                                                          4
                                                          2
                                                          0



                                                               General purpose technology   Advanced digital technology

                    Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3
                            econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.


                    This section presents the model results broken down by individual consumer
                    groups. This illustrates the sectoral areas of the UK economy which benefit
                    the most from 5G (and are most affected by the market barrier conditions
                    which affect adoption).
 5G will have the   Figure 8-4 below compares the projected cumulative GVA impacts over 2021-
 greatest impact    35 in each consumer group in the GPT and ADT scenarios (the relative
    on the Smart    impacts of the general purpose technology relative to advanced digital
urban consumer      technologies is shown in brackets). The cumulative economic impact of 5G
group in terms of   adoption over 2021-35 under the central market barriers case is projected at
      £s of GVA     £58bn for Smart urban, £39bn for public services and £15bn for
                    Manufacturing, logistics and distribution, in the General Purpose Technology
                    scenario. These three sectors have the largest (levels) benefits for two main
                    reasons:
                    •                Size – The (baseline) industrial composition of the UK economy is such
                                     that Smart urban, Public services and Manufacturing, logistics and
                                     distribution consumer groups are considerably larger than others
                                     (especially Smart urban). Collectively, these three consumer groups make
                                     up more than 2/3 of UK economic activity in GVA terms. A given change in
                                     GVA will therefore create greater levels impacts in these consumer
                                     groups.
                    •                Adoption – Benefits are also higher in the selected consumer groups
                                     because 5G adoption is faster than some other sectors (with the exception
                                     of Media and entertainment and High speed broadband in homes and
                                     offices). In particular, adoption is especially rapid in the Public services
                                     consumer group, adopting almost twice as fast as Retail and hospitality
                                     (slowest adoption). This is largely driven by the kind of applications 5G will
                                     enable and the relevance of these applications to each consumer group’s
                                     activities.


                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                          98
                                                                                                         Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    In the advanced digital technology scenario, the size of the impacts are
                    consistently smaller (as per scenario assumptions) but the extent to which
                    ADT impacts are lower varies depending on consumer group, ranging from 3.6
                    times larger (Smart urban) to 8.6 times larger (Retail and hospitality). The
                    principal reason for this variation across consumer groups relates the
                    assumed addressable market. The GPT scenario assumes by definition that
                    the technology is general in nature and the same market share is addressable
                    in all consumer groups. The ADT scenario is more pessimistic about the
                    potential addressable market, especially in retail and hospitality and rural
                    industries.
                    Figure 8-4. Cumulative GVA impacts of 5G adoption by region and country (central
                    market barriers case), 2021-35

                                        70
                                             (3.2)
                                        60
                                        50
                       £2018 billions




                                                      (4.5)
                                        40
                                        30
                                        20                     (4.5)    (8.6)     (3.3)    (3.2)     (4.8)
                                        10                                                                    (4.6)
                                                                                                                        (8.5)
                                         0




                                                     General purpose technology       Advanced digital technology

                    Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3
                            econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.

5G adoption will    Figure 8-5 charts the projected difference in GVA in 2035 from the no-5G
positively impact   baseline for UK regions and countries in the GPT and ADT scenarios under
       GVA in all   the central market barriers case. In the GPT scenario, impacts range from
       consumer     2.3% in Media and entertainment to 1.2% in Rural industries, while in the ADT
  groups, but to    scenario impacts range from 0.7% to 0.1%.
 varying extents
                    Variation between consumer groups impacts is mainly driven by the rate of
                    (and delays to) adoption. Media and entertainment and High speed broadband
                    in homes and offices are the fastest consumer groups to adopt 5G (both
                    counting as “early adopters” in AM report). This is due to eMBB supported use
                    cases (such as connectivity, UHD, AR/VR) and early adoption of IoT use
                    based on sensor network use cases.
                    Slow adoption is also the main reason that Retail and hospitality and Rural
                    industries have lower proportional impacts (relative to the baseline). In the
                    case of Retail and hospitality, a key driver of lukewarm adoption is issues in
                    understanding the business case or return on investment for sensor network
                    collation. This is further exacerbated by perceived competition with existing
                    technologies (fibre/4G/Wi-Fi). In the case of rural industries, this is principally
                    due to supply side issues (i.e. lack of mobile coverage).
                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                       99
                                                                                         Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    For the ADT scenario, impacts are also affected by addressable market
                    assumptions. Rural industries and Retail and hospitality consumer groups
                    have especially low addressable market shares (for similar reasons as weak
                    adoption, described above) and GVA impact are therefore especially
                    dampened.
                    Figure 8-5. Impact of 5G adoption on GVA in 2035 by region and country (% difference
                    from baseline), central market barrier case


                                                           General purpose technology
                                                     2.5
                        % difference from basleine




                                                      2
                                                     1.5
                                                      1
                                                     0.5
                                                      0




                                                           Advanced digital technology
                                                     0.8
                        % difference from basleine




                                                     0.7
                                                     0.6
                                                     0.5
                                                     0.4
                                                     0.3
                                                     0.2
                                                     0.1
                                                       0




 Three consumer     The consumer group results thus far have only considered the impacts
  groups emerge     associated with a central scenario for market barriers. When additional
    as having the   benefits associated with lowering market barriers are considered, three
most to gain from   consumer groups emerge as having the most to gain from the removal of
   the removal of   market barriers:
  market barriers
                    •              Manufacturing logistics and distribution – Feasible reductions in
                                   barriers are fairly even across 5G applications, however a reduction in
                                   remote object/machine manipulation is of particular importance given the
                                   relative importance this has to the consumer group’s activities and the
                                   extent to which this 5G application is delayed by market barriers.



                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                     100
                                                           Realising the Benefits of 5G


•   Smart urban – Also attributed to a range of 5G applications. Of particular
    interest are market barrier reductions for sensor networks, because this
    application is particularly relevant to Smart urban activities.
•   Rural industries – Market barriers create especially large delays for
    remote object/machine manipulation and smart tracking 5G applications.
From a policy perspective, these are the consumer groups whose benefits
depend most on action taken to reduce market barriers to 5G adoption. For
example, the manufacturing consumer group has the potential to have one of
the most rapid adoption pathways and, under the right conditions, could
experience a 2.4% boost to GVA relative to the baseline in 2035. However, if
market barriers are not addressed then adoption will be delayed and benefits
will be considerably smaller.
Media and entertainment has the same GVA impact trajectory both in the
central scenario and in the scenario with lower market barriers. This is
because in the central case there are already no market barriers dampening
or delating adoption (see Chapter 5 on market barrier assessments). Another
implication of this is that there are no additional benefits of removing market
barriers. Figure 8-6 and Figure 8-7 show how GVA impacts (% difference from
the baseline) is affected by market barriers across all consumer groups.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                           101
                                                                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


Figure 8-6. GVA impacts by consumer group relative and barrier scenarios (% difference from baseline, GPT assumption, 2021-35)




Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3 econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                                                  102
                                                                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


Figure 8-7. GVA impacts by consumer group relative and barrier scenarios (% difference from baseline, ADT assumption, 2021-35)




Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3 econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                                                  103
                                                                                             Realising the Benefits of 5G


      69-77% of      Figure 8-8 shows the additional GVA levels benefits from lower market
        extended     barriers over 2021-35 (cumulative). When accounting for differences in
    benefits from    consumer group size, the potential gains from addressing market barriers in
 lowering market     Smart urban and Manufacturing logistics and distribution becomes even more
   barriers are in   notable. Rural industries additional benefits are smaller in levels terms
  Smart urban or     because of the size of the sector.
   Manufacturing
                     Lowering market barriers to 5G in these two consumer groups alone would
consumer groups
                     extend cumulative (2021-35) benefits by £58bn under the GPT scenario
                     (£17bn under ADT). This implies that 69-77% of the benefits of lowering
                     market barriers are attributable to Smart urban or Manufacturing sector.
                     Figure 8-8. Additional GVA levels impact over baseline in 2035 from removing 5G market
                     barriers across consumer groups (difference between low market barrier case and
                     central market barrier case)

                                        50
                                        45
                                        40
                                        35
                       £2018 billions




                                        30
                                        25
                                        20
                                        15
                                        10
                                         5
                                         0




                                             General purpose technology   Advanced digital technology

                     Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3
                             econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.

                     To understand what is driving this result, it is helpful to examine both tails of
                     the results. At the upper tail, Smart urban has a very large impact due to the
                     combination of very large baseline GVA (highest of all consumer groups) and
                     also high addressable market share and change in market barriers across
                     central and barrier assessment scenarios.
                     At the lower tail, despite having the highest total addressable market (under
                     ADT), Media and entertainment contributes 0% of the benefits of lowering
                     market barriers. This is because there no market barriers which can be
                     feasibly removed from the central estimate. In a similar vein, despite
                     removable market barriers being very high, Rural industries contributes a
                     small share of additional benefits because of low addressable market share
                     and a very low baseline GVA. The ranking of consumer groups across factors
                     which affect these extended benefits are shown in Table 8-1.




                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                        104
                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


Table 8-1: Ranking of consumer groups across factors which affect extended benefits

                                      Market barrier      Baseline size       Addressable
                                      change                                  market (only
                                                                              affects ADT)

 Media and entertainment              9th                 8th                 1st

 Public services                      8th                 2nd                 4th

 Energy and utilities                 4th                 7th                 6th

 Rural industries                     1st                 9th                 8th

 Smart urban                          3rd                 1st                 2nd

 Transport                            6th                 6th                 7th

 Manufacturing, logistics and         2nd                 4th                 5th
 distribution

 High speed broadband into            7th                 5th                 3rd
 homes and offices

 Retail and hospitality               5th                 3rd                 9th
Notes: Market barrier change refers to the pp change in adoption rates which are attributable to
        differences in market barriers between the central scenario and the barrier assessment
        scenario; Baseline size refers to the relative GVA size of the consumer groups under
        the baseline; Addressable market refers to the total addressable market share of the
        consumer group (under ADT). All numbers refer to the ranking (e.g. Smart urban has
        the largest baseline size, Rural industries have the smallest).
Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3
        econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.

Figure 8-9 contains a matrix that indicates based on manipulation of the
intermediate model inputs which barrier reductions are most important for
boosting economic benefits. Specifically, the calculations comprised
multiplication of: (1) 5G feature relevance (by consumer group and feature);
(2) the differences in delay and adoption-rate parameters between central and
low barrier scenarios; and (3) relative economic size.
The findings indicate that removal of the market barriers holding back adoption
of sensor networks and remote object / machine manipulation in the Smart
urban and Manufacturing, logistics and distribution consumer groups could
bring the greatest economic benefit.
The key market barriers holding sensor network adoption back for these
consumer groups are: security concerns; lack of business case /
understanding of return on investment (ROI); lack of understanding of total
cost of ownership (TCO) / concern over ongoing costs/monthly data costs; and
concern over upfront (capital) costs.
Market barriers to remote object / machine manipulation are also important in
realising 5G benefits. In contrast to sensor networks, a key challenge of
remote object / machine manipulation is that the ecosystem is not yet ready or
made available. Adoption of object/machine manipulation is also held back by
a lack of understanding of 5G and the benefits that it offers.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                       105
                                                                                                                                                     Realising the Benefits of 5G



Figure 8-9: Matrix of relative importance (potential market barrier reductions, relevance of 5G features and economic size)




                                                                                                                                                               es
                                                                                                                                       fic
                                                                                                                                     of
                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                  io

                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                ut
                                                                                                                            rib

                                                                                                                            es
                                                                                                                          st

                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                       di

                                                                                                                      ho
                                                                                                                    nd

                                                                                                                   to
                                                                                                                  t




                                                                                                               sa

                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                              en




                                                                                                            tic

                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                            m




                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                         in




                                                                                                       gis


                                                                                                         a

                                                                                                       lit
                                                                                                        s




                                                                                                     db
                                                                                                    rta




                                                                                                    tie




                                                                                                   ita
                                                                                                    lo

                                                                                                oa
                                                                                                te




                                                                                                 s
                                                                                                ili




                                                                                               sp
                                                                                               g,
                                                                                              ie
                                                                                              es




                                                                                             br
                                                                                             ut
                                                                          en




                                                                                           rin




                                                                                           ho
                                                                                             r

                                                                                          an
                                                                                          vic




                                                                                            t
                                                                                          d

                                                                                        us




                                                                                          d
                                                                                        tu
                                                                       nd




                                                                                       rb




                                                                                      nd
                                                                                        t
                                                                                      an




                                                                                      ee
                                                                                       er




                                                                                     nd




                                                                                     ac
                                                                                     or
                                                                     aa




                                                                                   tu
                                                                                s




                                                                                  il a
                                                                                   sp
                                                                                  sp
                                                                                  gy




                                                                                  uf
                                                                                  li
                                                                             ic
                                                                     i




                                                                                ar
                                                                               er

                                                                               ra




                                                                               ta
                                                                  ed




                                                                               an

                                                                               an

                                                                               gh
                                                                           bl




                                                                            Sm
                                                                         Pu




                                                                            Ru




                                                                            Re
                                                                            En
                                                                 M




                                                                            M

                                                                            Hi
                                                                            Tr
AR/VR                                                              0.0     1.8      0.2    0.2     0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0     6.6                      8.8
UHD video                                                          0.0     4.7      0.0    0.0     2.1      0.3     0.0     0.0     0.6                      7.7
High-speed broadband                                               0.0     2.4      0.0    0.2     4.2      1.0     0.0     2.4     0.6                     10.9
Sensor networks                                                    0.0     0.0      1.6    0.5    21.0      0.8     3.9     0.0     3.2                     31.0
Remote object/machine manipulation                                 0.0     0.0      1.0    0.3    16.8      0.0     5.1     0.0     0.0                     23.3
Robotics                                                           0.0     0.0      0.7    0.0     5.3      0.0     1.7     0.0     0.0                      7.6
Connectivity for 5G drones                                         0.0     0.0      0.0    0.1     0.0      0.0     1.1     0.0     0.0                      1.3
Smart tracking                                                     0.0     0.0      0.0    0.1     0.0      1.3     2.5     0.0     0.0                      3.9
Connectivity for autonomous/connected vehicles                     0.0     0.0      0.0    0.0     4.2      0.5     0.8     0.0     0.0                      5.6

                                                                  0.0      8.9      3.5    1.5    53.7     3.8    15.2      2.4    11.1                   100.0
Notes: The values reported in the matrix are components of an index (which sums to 100) and do not have any direct interpretation other than indicating the relative economic
        significance of barrier reductions across 5G features and consumer groups.
Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3 econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                                                                     106
                                                              Realising the Benefits of 5G




Digital intensity
The results presented thus far estimate economic benefits based on the
adoption trajectories and addressable markets of the respective consumer
groups and the sensitivity of the whole UK economy to 5G (based on collated
evidence).
It is possible to construct an alternative measure of 5G benefits, which
accounts for additional asymmetries in impact potential of consumer groups
based on each consumer group’s relationship with digital technology.
Specifically, this approach characterises each consumer group’s relationship
with existing digital inputs to production and investments, by calculating the
relative importance of digital technologies (in value terms) relative to traditional
inputs to production and investments. The logic behind this approach is that
consumer groups with more intensive use of digital inputs and assets are
more likely to benefit from improvements to telecommunications technology,
such as 5G. Similar approaches have been taken in the literature whereby
economy-wide impacts were disaggregated by sector based on the use of ICT
and communications technologies as inputs to production by each sector.
This measure does not affect the aggregate potential economic impacts from
adoption in our model, but would affect the share of economic benefits
experienced by each consumer group.
Figure 8-10. Illustration of digital intensity




Sources: Cambridge Econometrics illustration




Cambridge Econometrics                                                              107
                                                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


       Economic      Figure 8-11shows the change in cumulative economic benefits that would be
 benefits in High    seen in the results if consumer group impacts were weighted by digital
            speed    intensity. Unsurprisingly, High speed broadband in homes and offices and
    broadband in     Media and Entertainment both register considerably higher economic benefits
      homes and      under the alternative measure (+£17bn and +£14bn, respectively under the
      offices and    GPT scenario). This means that cumulative economic benefits are twice as
       Media and     high, when weighted by digital intensity.
   entertainment
                     Manufacturing, logistics and distribution and Transport, however, both register
are twice as high
                     lower impacts under the alternative measure (-£7bn and £4bn, respectively
  when weighted
                     under the GPT scenario). This is due to the importance of traditional
        by digital
                     investments (e.g. premises and machinery) and inputs to production (e.g.
         intensity
                     physical components) to economic activities – implying lower relative
                     importance of digital investments/inputs to production.


                     Figure 8-11. Difference in GVA levels impact over baseline from weighting consumer
                     group impact potential by digital intensity (difference between low market barrier case
                     and central market barrier case, cumulative, 2021-35)

                                        20

                                        15
                       £2018 billions




                                        10

                                         5

                                         0

                                         -5

                                        -10




                                              General purpose technology   Advanced digital technology

                     Sources: Cambridge Econometrics calculations, Analysys Mason Calculations, MDM-E3
                             econometric model, ONS Supply and Use Tables.


                     These results provide a helpful indication of how differences in marginal
                     benefits of adoption across consumer groups might affect the projected
                     impacts of 5G. The results are however based on an imperfect (albeit helpful)
                     proxy. It is possible, for instance, that some subsectors of the UK economy
                     which currently rely heavily on traditional inputs to production will benefit
                     disproportionately from 5G due to fundamental differences between 5G
                     applications and existing digital technologies.




                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                       108
                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    Sub-national impacts
                    This section presents the model results for the nine English regions, Scotland,
                    Wales and Northern Ireland, together with the impacts in urban and rural
                    areas, both UK wide and in each region and country. In general, the absolute
                    magnitudes of the projected impact in each UK geography is largely driven by
                    the size of the given geography’s economy. Relative impacts (measured in
                    terms of the % difference from the baseline) are determined by several
                    factors, most notably sub-national roll-out and the consumer group
                    composition of each area.
 5G adoption will   In the general-purpose technology scenario, where adoption is widespread
have the greatest   across consumer groups and firm sizes, the cumulative economic impact of
       impact on    5G adoption over 2021-35 under the central market barriers case is projected
 London in terms    at £42bn for London, £23bn for the South East and £15bn for the Northwest.
    of £s of GVA    In the advanced digital technology scenario, the size of the impacts are
                    around four times smaller, consistent with the model assumptions and the
                    wider literature they are based on.
                    Figure 8-12 below compares the projected cumulative GVA impacts over
                    2021-35 in each region and country in the GPT and ADT scenarios.

                    Figure 8-12: Cumulative GVA impacts of 5G adoption by region and country (central market
                    barriers case), 2021-35




                     Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.



5G adoption will    There is variation in the size of the projected impacts between each region
positively impact   and country, but this is not as pronounced as the variation in consumer group
  GVA in all UK     impacts – indicating that within each region and country there is a sizeable
     regions and    proportion of firms in consumer groups that could benefit strongly from 5G
       countries.   adoption. For policymakers, these results emphasise the value of supporting
                    5G adoption across each of the UK regions, Wales, Scotland and Northern
                    Ireland.


                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                   109
                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


  Figure 8-13 charts the projected difference in GVA in 2035 from the no-5G
  baseline for UK regions and countries in the GPT and ADT scenarios under
  the central market barriers case. In the GPT scenario, impacts range from
  1.64% in London to 1.51% in Northern Ireland, while in the ADT scenario
  impacts range from 0.47% in London to 0.35% in Northern Ireland. Variation
  between sub-national impacts is driven by variation in adoption, but on the
  whole, in both scenarios there is low variance in impact between regions and
  countries.


Figure 8-13: Impact of 5G adoption on GVA in 2035 by region and country (% difference from
baseline), central market barrier case




Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.




  Cambridge Econometrics                                                                110
                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G



       Removing       By running the GPT and ADT scenarios under the low case market barrier
  market barriers     assumptions we can see which regions and countries stand to gain more from
  would have the      the removal of market barriers. In absolute terms, the gains from removing
largest impact in     market barriers are again driven by the sizes of the regions and countries
      the largest     themselves. This is presented in Figure 8-14 below for the GPT and ADT
     regions and      scenarios, in which the largest gains from removing market barriers are
        countries     projected in London (£7-23bn), the South East (£3-12bn) and the North West
                      (£2-8bn).
                      Figure 8-14: Cumulative impact of removing market barriers in each region and country in
                      the GPT and ADT scenarios over 2021-35 (difference between central market barrier case
                      and low market barrier case)




                       Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.



 Each region and      On the other hand, each UK region and country has the potential to realize
      country can     similar GVA gains from removing market barriers relative to the sizes of the
   realize similar    regions’ economies. Figure 8-15 below compares the relative gains from
    relative gains    removing market barriers in each region and country, measured as additional
from the removal      percentage point GVA impact over baseline in 2035. However, regions and
        of market     countries with higher projected relative impacts in the central case still have
           barriers   slightly more to gain in the low market barriers case. For example, London, the
                      region or country with the highest projected impact in the central case also has
                      the most to gain from the removal of market barriers (0.18-0.59pp), while
                      Northern Ireland, the region or country with the lowest projected impact in the
                      central case, also has the least to gain from the removal of market barriers
                      (0.10-0.47pp).




                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 111
                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    Figure 8-15: Additional percentage point GVA impact over baseline in 2035 from
                    removing 5G market barriers in each region and country (difference between low market
                    barrier case and central market barrier case)




                    Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.



 In levels terms,    Turning to urban and rural impacts, Figure 8-16 plots the projected annual
   the impact on     GVA impact of 5G adoption on the UK’s urban areas and rural areas. Again,
urban areas will     these impacts are mainly driven by the size of the respective economies in
be greater than      urban and rural areas, and hence the projected urban impacts are markedly
      rural areas    larger, with a cumulative impact of £139.8bn over 2021-35 in urban areas
                     compared to £19.7bn in rural areas in the GPT scenario and £36.2bn in urban
                    areas compared to £4.5bn in rural areas in the ADT scenario.




                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                                  112
                                                                                        Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     Figure 8-16: Projected annual GVA impacts of 5G adoption in UK-wide urban and
                     rural areas in the GPT and APT scenarios, central market barrier case




                      Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.



   Greater urban     In addition to the size of urban economies, projected greater impacts in urban
      impacts are    areas are also driven by faster roll-out in these areas, which leads to faster
  partly driven by   adoption in urban areas. Figure 8-17 plots the projected % GVA impact over
faster 5G roll-out   the baseline in each year across all rural and urban areas in the UK in the
  and adoption in    GPT and ADT scenarios. Impacts in rural areas are relatively smaller because
     urban areas     roll-out, and hence adoption, does not pick up in rural areas until 2025 – this is
                     visible on the figure below in which impacts in rural areas are negligible before
                     2025.
The gap between      Another interesting finding shown in Figure 8-17 is that the gap between urban
  urban and rural    and rural impacts is relatively smaller in the GTP scenario. In the GPT
        impacts is   scenario, the relative GVA impact of 5G adoption in 2035 is around 7% for
relatively smaller   urban areas than rural areas, while in the ADT scenario this figure stands at
       in the GPT    21%. This reflects the fact that in the ADT scenario, the consumer groups with
          scenario   greater adoption are more concentrated in urban areas, while in the GPT
                     scenario adoption is widespread across all consumer groups, and hence more
                     equal in urban and rural areas.

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                   113
                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G


                   Figure 8-17: Percentage GVA difference from baseline in UK-wide rural and urban
                   areas over 2021-35, central market barrier case




                    Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.



Relative urban     Relative urban impacts within regions are also generally larger than rural
   impacts are     impacts, though only by a small margin. Figure 8-18 shows the projected
 slightly larger   impacts in the urban and rural parts of each region, measured by difference
     than rural    from baseline GVA in 2035. Except for London, the differences between rural
 impacts in all    and urban impacts between each region are very similar, indicating similar
        regions    levels of adoption in rural areas and urban areas between regions. The
                   difference between impacts in rural and urban London stems from the
                   composition of consumer groups in rural London, in particular relatively high
                   importance of Public services in the local economy. However, it should be
                   noted that rural London is a very small region.




                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                   114
                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G


                   Figure 8-18: Impact of 5G adoption on GVA (% difference from baseline) in 2035 in rural
                   and urban areas, central market barrier case




                    Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.



    Urban areas    Figure 8-19 shows the projected impact of removing market barriers in 2035
   have more to    on rural and urban areas within regions, calculated by subtracting impacts
       gain from   under the central market barrier case from impacts under the low market
removing market    barrier case. The main finding is that urban areas have more to gain than rural
   barriers than   areas from the removal of market barriers, though in most cases the additional
     rural areas   gain is only around one percentage point. This follows from the fact that
                   adoption is low in rural areas in the earlier years under both sets of market
                   barrier assumptions, meaning that rural areas are unable to capitalise on
                   lower market barriers in these years. It is worth noting that if roll-out was sped
                   up in rural areas, thus addressing a supply-side market barrier (this model
                   only considers demand-side barriers), the gap would close somewhat between
                   potential gains from removing demand-side barriers in urban and rural areas.




                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                   115
                                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G


    In the ADT     In the ADT scenario, adoption is modelled as lower in smaller businesses and
 scenario, rural   in some consumer groups (including rural industries) compared to the GPT
    areas have     scenario, in which adoption is widespread across firm sizes and consumer
markedly less to   groups. The model results show that under this scenario, the potential GVA
      gain from    gains for rural from removing market barriers are relatively low in the ADT
     removal of    scenario, at around 25-40% of the GVA gains in urban areas in 2035
 market barriers   compared to 10-18% in the GPT scenario 40.

                   Figure 8-19: Additional percentage point GVA impact over baseline in 2035 from removing 5G
                   market barriers in within-region/country rural and urban areas (difference between low market
                   barrier case and central market barrier case)




                        Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.




                   40
                        This excludes London, which has a very small rural area and for which rural results should be treated as
                   an outlier.

                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                   116
                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


 There is limited    Given that private networks are a new feature of mobile networks and that
evidence around      very few firms have adopted private networks (or 5G in general) at the time of
the future extent    writing, there is great uncertainty around the extent to which private networks
    and profile of   will be adopted and the types of firms which will use private networks. The
 private network     impact model includes the option for the model user to explore the potential
              use    impacts of private network adoption by different consumer groups on the
                     regional GVA, but it is important to stress that we are not forecasting private
                     network adoption in this report.
 Private network     Nonetheless, it is still interesting to consider the potential impacts of private
  adoption could     network adoption based on the current profile of private network adoption in
    have greater     the UK. Figure 8-20 below projects relative impacts of private network
 impacts in rural    adoption on UK regions and countries, based on the assumption that only the
           areas     largest firms in the manufacturing, logistics and distribution consumer group
                     and the energy and utilities consumer group will use private networks (and
                     only 5% of adoption in these consumer groups will use private networks).
                     While the impacts are very small (directly because adoption is assumed to be
                     small), the model results are interesting in that rural areas are projected to see
                     greater private network adoption and impacts than urban areas. This reflects a
                     relatively high concentration in rural areas of firms in the manufacturing,
                     logistics and distribution consumer group and the energy and utilities
                     consumer group.




                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                             117
                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G


Figure 8-20: Projected impact of 5G adoption using private networks on region/country
GVA (% difference from baseline) in 2035 in rural and urban areas, central market barrier
case




Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.




8.3    Environmental impacts
This section present projections of environmental impacts from the model in
terms of avoided CO2 emissions and monetised using BEIS carbon price
projections. Note that our approach to modelling each type of impact was
shaped by the available evidence, and as such we have had to use separate
methodologies from the economic impact estimates. This means that the
monetised social and environmental impact estimates should not be added to
the economic impact estimates.
The estimated impacts measure the impacts in terms of avoided emissions
attributable to 5G-enabled features of certain mobile technology use cases.
These estimates concern only the incremental emissions savings over the
emissions savings offered by the present-day mobile technologies. Before
discussing the results, it is worth noting that the environmental impacts may
be greater if new 5G use cases emerge in future with the ability to facilitate
Cambridge Econometrics                                                         118
                                                                              Realising the Benefits of 5G


                    further emissions savings. The projections in this model are based on current
                    use cases for mobile network technology which are hence most likely a sub-
                    set of the future use cases through which 5G could lead to lower emissions.
                    This means that the GPT scenario projections should be viewed as lower
                    bounds; 5G as a GPT technology would have a much wider set of use cases
                    than 4G, but we do not yet have empirical data on the potential for these use
                    cases to lower emissions.
Up to 184 million   The model results show increasing annual emissions savings from 5G
  tonnes of CO2     adoption over 2021-35. In the most ambitious scenario, where 5G is modelled
 could be saved     as a GPT technology, annual avoided emissions reaches around 27 million
       due to 5G    tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (mtCO2e) by 2035, and cumulative
   adoption over    avoided emisisons over 2021-35 equal around 184mtCO2e. The path of these
        2021-35     emissions savings is projected to follow the path of adoption, with annual
                    emissions savings growing each year as adoption increases.
                    Figure 8-21 shows the projected avoided emissions in the GPT and ADT
                    scenarios, together with their estimated monetary value. The GPT impacts are
                    markedly larger in the ADT case, driven by wider adoption of the modelled use
                    cases, though as noted above we would expect the gap between the two
                    scenarios to be even larger after accounting for future GPT use cases for 5G
                    (for which data is currently unavailable).




                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                          119
                                                                                                     Realising the Benefits of 5G


                             Figure 8-21: Projected annual avoided emissions from 5G adoption over 2021-35 in
                             the GPT and ADT scenarios, central market barriers case




                           Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.



           Avoided    The projected emissions savings for each consumer group 41, together with
   emissions are      monetised value of these savings, are presented in Figure 8-22 below for the
       greatest in    modelled scenarios. The greatest emissions savings are projected to result
consumer groups       from 5G adoption of use cases in the transport, high speed broadband into
     for which 5G     offices and homes and retail and hospitality consumer groups. This is because
          improves    many of the modelled use cases classified within these consumer groups lead
          transport   to improved transport efficiency or reduced travel (and hence lower transport
      efficiency or   vehicle emissions). These types of use cases were found to bring particularly
   reduces travel     high enabled emissions savings in (GSMA 2018). Examples of such use
                      cases include smart logistics and traffic congestion management (transport
                      consumer group), smart working use cases (high speed broadband into offices
                      and home consumer group), and mobile shopping applications (retail and
                      hospitality consumer group).


                      41
                           Note that we have not estimated environmental benefits for the media and entertainment consumer group
                      as none of the avoided emissions factors from (GSMA 2018) correspond to the media and entertainment
                      use cases.

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                               120
                                                                                          Realising the Benefits of 5G


                        Figure 8-22: Projected cumulative avoided emissions from 5G adoption over 2021-35
                        in each consumer group, central market barriers case




                        Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.



         Potential       After running the model with low market barrier assumptions, the results
       emissions         indicate that total cumulative emissions savings over 2021-35 would increase
    savings from         by around 18% if market barriers were removed. However, the potential
removing market          savings are much larger for some consumer groups than others. Consumer
      barriers are       groups for which business use cases were modelled are projected to realise
  highest in rural       relatively higher emissions savings as a result of removing market barriers,
       industries,       with the highest potential savings in rural industries (73%), manufacturing,
  manufacturing,         logistics and distribution (41%), smart urban (33%) and energy and utilities
     logistics and       (32%). In these consumer groups, emissions saving 5G use cases are mainly
      distribution,      business use cases whereas in the other consumer groups, the modelled use
 smart urban and         cases are largely 5G consumer smartphone applications, which have been
      energy and         modelled as having lower market barriers in the central case.
            utilities
                         Figure 8-23 below shows the percentage increase in cumulative emissions
                         savings in each consumer group and in total from removing market barriers.

                         Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 121
                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G




                   Figure 8-23: Percentage increase in avoided emissions in each consumer group and in
                   total from removing market barriers, (calculated by comparing the central market barriers
                   case to the low market barriers case)




                    Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.
                    Note: that these percentages do not differ between the GPT and ADT scenarios because
                             the impact market barriers unchanged between the two scenarios



                   8.4     Social impacts
                   Social impacts are estimated as the time savings resulting from consumer IoT
                   devices with features supported by 5G features that result in time savings for
                   individuals. These time savings have been converted to monetary values of
                   time saved using the approach described in Section 6.6 (the social impact
                   estimates should not be added to the economic impact estimates – see
                   Section 8.2).

 The estimates     It is worth noting that the estimated impacts are based on the lower-end
are subject to a   parameters obtained from the reviewed literature. Use of higher-end
     substantial   parameters in model calculations could result in estimates that are over twice
      degree of    as high. Therefore, a high degree of uncertainty remains over the estimated
    uncertainty    time savings and their value. At the same time, the remaining social benefits
                   of 5G which could not have been quantified due to lack of data (health,
                   wellbeing, quality of life etc.) could also be significant, and their potential value
                   should be considered when assessing uncertainty of the estimated social
                   benefits.
                   Figure 8-24 presents the evolution of annual value of total time saved under
                   the GPT scenario, for both central and low market barrier scenario cases.
                   Adoption of 5G-enabled IoT consumer technologies is assumed to follow the
                   same pattern as adoption of ‘High-speed broadband into homes and offices’.
                   The projected market penetration is also assumed to be the same as for
                   businesses under the respective addressable market assumptions for
                   ‘High-speed broadband into homes and offices’ consumer group under the
                   GPT or the ADT scenario assumptions. Therefore, the gradual increases in

                   Cambridge Econometrics                                                                   122
                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     annual value of time saved follow a similar pattern. Annual value of time saved
                     is projected to reach £0.5bn in 2025 under the central barriers case, or £0.7bn
                     under the low barriers case.
  Under the GPT      Due to the increasing adoption of 5G-enabled household and personal IoT
        scenario     devices, by 2030 the annual value of time saved will reach £1.9bn under the
assumptions, the     central barriers case, or £2.1bn under the low market barrier case. In later
 annual value of     years adoption converges under the central and the low market barrier cases,
   time saved is     resulting in similar estimated values of time saved reaching, at £2.6bn
     projected to    annually under both scenarios in 2035.
 reach £2.6bn in     The annual value of time saved curve has a different shape to that of the
            2035     economic benefits curves presented in Figure 8-6. This is because in the
                     calculation of economic benefits, adoption affects the GVA growth rate each
                     year, which compounds over the years to produce a difference from the
                     baseline, and a difference between the Central and the Low barrier scenario
                     cases. In contrast, calculation of social benefits assumes that adoption
                     determines the level social benefits in any given year, which are not influenced
                     by the previous years’ adoption rate.
                     Figure 8-24: Value of time saved under GPT scenario – Central and Low market barrier
                     cases.




                     Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.


   … while under     Analogous results are presented in Figure 8-25 for the ADT scenario, for both
the ADT scenario     central and low cases of market barriers. As adoption rate of 5G-enabled IoT
 assumptions, the    devices by individuals is assessed to be lower than in the GPT scenario, the
  annual value of    monetary value of time saved is also lower.
    time saved is
                     The annual value of time saved (UK-wide aggregate) in 2020 reaches £0.4bn
      projected to
                     under the central barrier case, and £0.5bn under the low barrier case. In 2030,
  reach £2.0bn in
                     these values increase to £1.4bn and £1.6bn under the central and low barrier
             2035
                     assumptions, respectively. In 2035 the difference between the two barrier
                     scenarios declines, with annual value of time saved increasing to £2.0bn
                     under both scenarios.




                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                  123
                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     Figure 8-25: Value of time saved under ADT scenario – Central and Low market barrier
                     cases.




                     Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.


    Cumulatively     Comparisons of cumulative impacts over the modelled period (2021-35)
   over 2020-35,     demonstrate the potential impact of removing market barriers. Under the GPT
       removal of    scenario assumptions, the cumulative value of social benefits is estimated at
  market barriers    £19.7bn for the central market barriers case, and at £22.1bn for the low
   could result in   market barriers case. This means that removal of market barriers could result
    time savings     in an additional £2.4bn of social benefits under the GPT scenario assumptions
    worth £2.5bn     over the 2021-35 period.
  under the GPT
                     Under the ADT scenario assumptions, the cumulative value of social benefits
      scenario or
                     is estimated at £14.9bn for the central market barriers case, and at £16.7bn
£1.8bn under the
                     for the low market barriers case. Therefore, removal of market barriers under
   ADT scenario
                     the ADT scenario assumptions could result in an additional £1.8bn of social
                     benefits over the 2021-35 period.




                     8.5     Benchmarking the model results
                     One way of assessing the uncertainty around the model results and to get a
                     feel for the plausibility of the results is to benchmark against other studies.
                     This allows a feel for how conservative or optimistic the model results are
                     compared to other studies. Table 8-2 below compares the economic impact
                     estimates from our model to several other studies that have also attempted to
                     project the impact of 5G on the UK or other economies with similar
                     characteristics.




                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                  124
                                                                    Realising the Benefits of 5G


Table 8-2: Cross-study comparison of economic impact estimates of 5G

Country                              Impact of     Impact of      Impact of    Impact of 5G
                   Study            5G by 2030    5G by 2034     5G by 2035      by 2050

UK         Cambridge                  £2.7bn -      £7.6bn -      £9.1bn -            -
           Econometrics and           £16.3bn       £35.6bn       £42.0bn
           Analysys Mason (2021)


           GSMA (2020)                £5.16bn       £12.7bn          -                -




           (PwC 2021)                  £43bn           -             -                -




Scotland Deloitte (2019)                 -             -           £17bn           £34bn




Australia Australian Government       £24.7bn          -             -           £33.5bn -
          (2018)                                                                 £156.2bn



Source: Cited studies and Cambridge Econometrics calculations.


Two insights stand out from inspecting the results in the above table. Firstly,
the projections from our model are relatively conservative compared to the
wider literature. The results from the ADT scenario are markedly lower than
the findings from the other studies, with the results from the GSMA study
closest to the ADT scenario projections, though still almost twice as large. On
the other hand, PwC estimate benefits far greater than the GPT scenario in
our model, while Deloitte and the Australian Government also estimate larger
impacts, after taking into account that they are estimating impacts for smaller
economies than the UK.
This leads us on to the second finding from this benchmarking exercise – the
wide range in the magnitude of the benefits projected by the various studies.
This wide range of magnitudes is indicative of the high levels of uncertainty
around the future impacts of 5G adoption, given the lack of empirical
evidence, and the sensitivity of the estimates to the methodology and
assumptions employed.
It is difficult to pinpoint the reasons behind the variation in magnitude of the
estimates of each of these studies. Regarding the conservativeness of our
estimates compared to some of the other studies, one reason is likely our
focus on quantifying only additional impacts of 5G. We sought to capture
additional in our study by considering historical impacts of previous
technologies for sufficient data were available to empirically estimate
additional impacts. On the other hand, studies that rely on stakeholder inputs
or on estimates of technologies associated with 5G (but not for which 5G is
critical) are less likely to have fully accounted for additionality. However, the
key driver of the wide range of estimates is the lack of empirical data to
ground the model in, meaning that to quantify the impacts assumptions have
to be developed which require a degree of subjective judgement. It is thus
important to bear in mind that much of the value of the model lies in the
Cambridge Econometrics                                                                     125
                                                          Realising the Benefits of 5G


relative results (i.e. comparisons between consumer groups, market barriers
and geographies) than the absolute results, which we have tried to bring out in
our discussion of the model results.




Cambridge Econometrics                                                          126
                                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G



                    9       Conclusions

                    9.1     5G use cases and consumer groups
   The literature   At this stage of 5G development, many of the potential use cases have yet to
     suggests a     reach commercial maturity. Many trials are under way into individual use
diverse range of    cases (and clusters of use cases) that individual businesses have identified as
potential 5G use    potentially useful or necessary to their businesses and which might be
       cases for    enabled through 5G. Some early adopters of 5G previously used 4G
     individuals,   connectivity, and some have and still do use Wi-Fi and other short-range
households and      wireless technologies for some of the use cases that 5G will support. Many
    businesses.     businesses rely on fixed broadband to provide their main business
                    connectivity. What 5G offers for businesses that have invested in existing
                    technologies will vary depending on the nature of each business and the
                    individual requirements that businesses have.

                    9.2     5G positioning relative to other connectivity technologies
   5G will bring    It is difficult to generalise the benefits of positioning of 5G over existing
    incremental     technologies, since the range of potential use cases and sectors of the
benefits over 4G    economy that might use 5G are so broad. Evidence from the literature we
                    have reviewed on the incremental benefits of 5G over 4G typically refers to
                    aspects such as the amount of data that 5G is able to transfer being
                    considerably higher, the ability to maintain connections with very low latency,
                    ability to deliver contextual information in real time (e.g. maps, physical
                    objects, environments) and the ability to connect many devices, and process
                    and utilise data from those devices, in real time.
But 5G, together    Together with other technological advances such as industrial AR/VR
       with other   applications, robotics systems and cloud computing taking place in parallel
   technological    with the evolution of 5G, the 5G migration from 4G will potentially represent a
advances, could     more transformative change in mobile connectivity than that from 3G to 4G, for
 also have more     example. However, significant uncertainties exist still concerning the rate of
transformational    adoption, and the scale of the benefits achieved. For this transformational
         impacts    benefit to be achieved, there is a need for 5G infrastructure and the
                    associated software and hardware that 5G will integrate with (cloud-based
                    core networks, AR/VR, robotics and the associated software delivering
                    machine manipulation, data mining and precision processes, for example) to
                    be deployed in full, including virtualised, cloud-native 5G core networks, end-
                    to-end slices and wide geographic coverage and capacity.
Wi-Fi 6 could be    Although some degree of momentum exists behind developments of Wi-Fi 6 to
 a substitute for   increase capacity and functionality of Wi-Fi solutions, the eco-system for Wi-Fi
some, but not all   remains one of a low power, short-range wireless solution, suited to specific
  5G use cases      deployment environments only. It is very likely that, in some environments and
                    for some use cases, Wi-Fi will remain sufficient to meet the needs of some of
                    the use cases and consumer groups considered in this study (and there may
                    be benefits of using Wi-Fi for some uses and environments, for example if
                    economies of scale make deployment costs favourable when compared to
                    other options). A key question in the UK and in Europe with regards to Wi-Fi 6
                    is the extent to which additional spectrum in the upper 6GHz band might be
                    available for Wi-Fi use. European countries including the UK have agreed to

                    Cambridge Econometrics                                                           127
                                                                                 Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     making the 5945-6425MHz band available for Wi-Fi (including Wi-Fi 6). In the
                     USA, an additional 700MHz (6425-7125MHz) is being made available on a
                     licence-exempt basis, suited to Wi-Fi use. A decision on future use of the
                     6425-7125MHz band in other markets, including Europe, is under study ahead
                     of the ITU World Radiocommunications Conference, taking place in 2023. 5G
                     proponents in Europe (including the major 5G equipment vendors) are
                     favouring this spectrum being used for licensed 5G use.

                     9.3     Barriers to 5G adoption
      Barriers to    The study has identified several key barriers to 5G adoption which, if not
adoption include     addressed by the market and/or via proactive Government action, might either
   cross-market      delay or slow adoption of 5G within some or all 5G consumer groups. Macro
    barriers and     barriers are cross-market barriers cutting across multiple areas/consumer
 market-specific     groups and 5G applications. These include willingness to pay for 5G services
         barriers    by individuals and businesses, and lack of awareness concerning suitability of
                     5G and/or the benefits that 5G will deliver, together with the mobile industry’s
                     uncertainty over further 5G investment within public networks ahead of
                     demand being established. Micro barriers include multiple barriers affecting
                     some or several consumer groups and some 5G applications e.g. eco-system
                     barriers.
 The market face     A need for short-term ROI from MNOs investing in step-by-step increments to
  a ‘chicken and     5G functionality in public mobile networks potentially creates a supply-side
       egg’ issue    barrier that will prevent the market developing at the pace that policy makers,
                     and some potential users, might wish. This ‘chicken and egg’ issue might
                     resolve in due course e.g. rapid adoption of 5G SA devices by individual
                     consumers might incentivise further investment in 5G SA features benefitting a
                     range of consumer groups.
  Scaling up 5G      A key conclusion is therefore that MNOs and 5G vendors should be
 public networks     encouraged to work on implementing the latest 5G features and scaling up UK
could incentivise    5G networks to deploy these features, such that nationwide networks will, in
 earlier adoption    time, address the full range of use cases that 5G technology will support. This
                     scaling up of 5G public networks to cater for the full range of use cases (via
                     5G standalone networks with slicing) might help to reduce risk to early
                     adopters wishing to utilise these nascent 5G features.
Some users face      It is evident from literature and from evidence gathered during this study that
a skills challenge   there is substantial momentum in the 5G ecosystem. There is also significant
with regard to 5G    awareness in the market on what 5G ‘could’ deliver. However, behind the 5G
  implementation     vision is a complex range of implementation issues, and some 5G users at
                     least (especially smaller businesses) are challenged by not having the internal
                     capability and skills needed to set up and integrate 5G connectivity into
                     existing business systems. This skills challenge is especially relevant given
                     the early stage of 5G implementation, given that systems are far from being
                     commoditised (and may never be). Businesses whose core activity is not
                     telecommunications may also not be well placed to drive the broader 5G
                     features and evolution agenda (e.g. they do not participate in 3GPP or other
                     5G industry forum). Thus, there is a key role (and cost therein) for 5G
                     solutions experts (be those the large 5G vendors, system integrators or large
                     IT firms) to provide professional support services to smaller firms in particular
                     with respect to 5G implementation, maintaining solutions, together with scaling
                     up and evolving these systems as new features emerge. However, a key risk
                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                            128
                                                                                    Realising the Benefits of 5G


                       is that this ‘service support’ cost can be sizeable (representing a tangible
                       barrier to adoption for smaller firms).
                       One positive implication of the momentum that exists behind the 5G
                       ecosystem is that substantial investment continues to be made by the large
                       equipment vendors into optimising and enhancing 5G solutions. The 5G eco-
                       system might also emerge to be more dynamic and flexible, compared to
                       previous generations of mobile technology, due to the parallel developments
                       into open software solutions and cloud-based architecture. Thus, the
                       opportunity exists for smaller scale innovators to play a bigger role in the 5G
                       ecosystem compared to previous generations of wireless technology.

                       9.4     The role of private 5G networks
Private networks       What is also evident from the study is that the role of private 5G networks
    are currently      appears to be important in the market place in the short term, at least to
 important to the      demonstrate proof of concept of 5G being capable of addressing specific
market, but could      business needs, albeit in a mode of deployment that is contained within the
           cause       premises of individual businesses. This creates a risk of fragmentation, if the
     fragmented        various deployment options for 5G (NSA, SA, public, private) do not converge
 demand across         to enable seamless operation across devices and domains, and across the
          the UK       UK. There is a specific risk that private 5G deployment might result in
                       fragmented demand for industrial applications across the UK (e.g. if some
                       industries can access 5G services where others cannot), which risks slow
                       investment by MNOs to add further capabilities if demand is not evident at
                       scale.
Funded trials and      Finally, as 5G gains momentum both in private and public network
test-bed activities    deployments, another conclusion from the study is that funded trials and test-
        will remain    bed activities will remain relevant and useful to raise the awareness on 5G
      relevant and     implementation and lower the barriers to deployment.
              useful
                       9.5     Barriers that the market will address
    Some barriers      We can expect that some of the barriers that this report discusses will be
will be addressed      addressed by the market as the 5G market evolves (e.g. achieving further roll-
     by the market     out of the latest 3GPP 5G features).
                       The two key demand-side barriers which we expect will be addressed by the
                       market include ‘cultural resistance to change’ and ‘existing technologies are
                       seen as sufficient’. As such as the momentum surrounding the 5G ecosystem
                       continues to develop we expect these will be naturally addressed by the
                       market overtime.
                       Whilst some barriers will be addressed as the 5G market evolves, there are
                       several key barriers which the market might be slow to address, or which the
                       market may not address at all absent of targeted Government policy. These
                       are discussed in the following section.

                       9.6     Economic impact modelling
                       A key aim of this study was to identify the economic benefits which could be
                       experienced as a result of adoption of 5G technologies. This was done by
                       drawing on the wider economic evidence base on 5G impacts, economic
                       projections from CE’s MDM-E3 macroeconomic model, and various internal
                       findings from other workstreams in this project (principally relating to adoption,
                       Cambridge Econometrics                                                             129
                                                                                      Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     barriers and total addressable markets). It important to again note that there is
                     considerable uncertainty around the model results, which is the case for any
                     forward-looking projection, but is especially true here due to the shortage of
                     empirical evidence on 5G.
Cumulative total     Key findings relating to economic benefits of 5G are summarised in Table 9-1.
  benefits were      Depending on the technology assumptions (GPT or ADT), the total benefits
 £41bn-£159bn        were found to be £41bn-£159bn cumulatively over 2021-35.
       The ‘Smart    Due to the pace of adoption coupled with the economic size of these
 urban’ consumer     consumer groups, Smart urban, Public services and Manufacturing, logistics
        group had    and distribution have the largest cumulative benefits in levels terms under the
    registered the   GPT scenario (£58bn, £39bn and £15bn respectively). However, in
largest economic     proportional terms (i.e. % difference from baseline) High speed broadband to
           benefit   homes and offices and Media and entertainment experience the largest
                     impacts in proportional terms, because they are the most rapid adopters of
                     5G.
                     The ranking of impacts changes between GPT and ADT scenarios principally
                     because of fundamental assumptions about the total addressable market. By
                     definition, 5G is assumed to be “general purpose” under the GPT scenario and
                     the share of the market which is addressable is proportionately the same
                     across consumer groups. In contrast, there is greater variation in the
                     addressable market share across consumer groups in the ADT scenario, with
                     Rural industries, Retail and hospitality and Manufacturing, logistics and
                     distribution having appreciably lower GVA impacts as a result.


                     Table 9-1 – Central economic benefits (£2018bn, cumulative, 2021-35)

                                                                              General          Advanced
                                                                              purpose            digital
                                                                            technology        technology
                     Total                                                 159.4             40.7
                     Smart urban                                           57.9              17.9
                     Public services                                       39.1              8.7
                     Manufacturing, logistics and distribution             14.8              3.3
                     Retail and hospitality                                12.6              1.5
                     High speed broadband into homes and offices 12.4                        3.7
                     Media and entertainment                               9.8               3.0
                     Transport                                             7.0               1.4
                     Energy and utilities                                  4.8               1.0
                     Rural industries                                      1.1               0.1


        Economic     The study also found that economic benefits could be extended by a further
benefits could be    £22bn-£84bn over 2021-35 if market barriers are addressed, therein
   £22bn-£84bn       highlighting the role of policy in fully realising 5G benefits. The additional
 higher if market    benefits from a reduction in market barriers is shown in Table 9-2.
     barriers are
                     Based on assessments of market barriers across scenarios, Smart urban and
       addressed
                     Manufacturing, logistics and distribution stand to gain the most from lowering

                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                 130
                                                                                        Realising the Benefits of 5G


                      market barriers (£17bn-£58bn additional economic benefits would be realised
                      from reducing 5G market barriers in these two consumer groups).
                      Table 9-2 – Additional benefits from a reduction of market barriers (£2018bn, cumulative,
                      2021-35)

                                                                                General          Advanced
                                                                                purpose            digital
                                                                              technology        technology
                      Total                                                  +83.7             +21.6
                      Smart urban                                            +45.6             +14.0
                      Manufacturing, logistics and distribution              +12.5             +2.8
                      Retail and hospitality                                 +8.2              +0.9
                      Public services                                        +8.0              +1.8
                      Transport                                              +3.1              +0.6
                      High speed broadband into homes and offices +2.5                         +0.7
                      Energy and utilities                                   +2.4              +0.5
                      Rural industries                                       +1.5              +0.2
                      Media and entertainment                                +0.0              +0.0


  Digital intensity   The study extended the analysis by considering how the share of benefits
      can provide     attributed to each consumer group might vary depending on digital intensity.
  further insights    This line of analysis provided insight into how each consumer group’s
            on the    relationship with digital technology may affect impact potential of 5G.
    distribution of
                      High speed broadband in homes and offices and Media and Entertainment
           benefits
                      both register considerably higher economic benefits under this alternative
                      measure (+£17bn and +£14bn, respectively under the GPT scenario).
                      Manufacturing, logistics and distribution and Transport, however, both register
                      lower impacts under the alternative measure (-£7bn and £4bn, respectively
                      under the GPT scenario).
5G adoption will      This is indicative of the breadth of 5G use cases across consumer groups.
positively impact     The largest impacts are estimated in London (£42bn in the GPT scenario and
  GVA in all UK       £12bn in the ADT scenario), the South East (£23bn in the GPT scenario and
     regions and      £5bn in the ADT scenario) and the South West (£15bn in the GPT scenario
        countries     and £4bn in the ADT scenario), though this is mainly driven by the size of
                      these regions. Likewise, the largest regions would realize the largest benefits
                      from removing barriers to adoption.
There is variation    While some regions have more to gain than others from removing market
        in impacts    barriers, all regions could experience significant gains. Measured as change in
 between regions      % difference from the economic baseline, the impacts range from 0.59pp
  and countries in    (London) to 0.47pp (Northern Ireland) in the GPT scenario and 0.18pp
    relative terms    (London) to 0.10pp (Northern Ireland) in the ADT scenario by 2035.




                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                                  131
                                                                                   Realising the Benefits of 5G


 The main driver      Urban areas within-each region and country are expected to benefit more
    of variation in   strongly from 5G because it will be rolled out there first. GVA gains in urban
     relative sub-    areas are projected to range from 0.59pp (London) to 0.51pp (Northern
national impacts      Ireland) in the GPT scenario and from 0.18pp (London) to 0.12pp (Northern
 is the roll-out of   Ireland) in the ADT scenario.
               5G.

     In the ADT       However, rural areas are still expected to benefit strongly from 5G adoption in
       scenario,      the GPT scenario, where adoption is widespread across consumer groups. In
    impacts are       the ADT scenario, impacts are markedly lower in rural areas, as a result of
 markedly lower       lower adoption in smaller businesses and in some consumer groups (including
  in rural areas      rural industries) which account for a relative high share of economic activity in
                      rural areas. Therefore, while rural impacts are lower than urban impacts, the
                      results indicate that 5G adoption will be important to rural economies in the
                      GPT scenario where 5G use cases are broader than for previous mobile
                      technologies.
 Hence, impacts       GVA gains in rural areas in 2035 are projected to be around 10-18% lower in
     of removing      the GPT scenario and 25-40% lower in the ADT scenario (with the exception
     barriers are     of London).
   lower in rural
           areas

Private networks      The model results indicate that private networks may be particularly important
          may be      to rural areas. This result is driven by two factors: the slower roll-out of public
      particularly    networks stimulating demand for private networks as an alternative; and rural
    important for     areas having a relatively high share of firms in consumer groups, which favour
      rural areas     the specific use cases for which private networks offer an advantage. Private
                      network adoption was modelled as exclusive to Manufacturing, logistics and
                      distribution and energy and utilities best on our mapping of the use cases best
                      supported by private networks discussed in Section 3.2 to the consumer
                      groups, together with an analysis of the firms that have set up private
                      networks in the UK to date, which largely fall within these two consumer
                      groups.




                      9.7       Environmental impact modelling
    We modelled       The way in which 5G use leads to emissions savings depends on the types of
         avoided      use case:
       emissions
                            •   IoT machine to machine use cases such as those in buildings,
brought about by
                                transport, manufacturing, and the energy sector, will enable emissions
  IoT machine to
                                savings through improved efficiency.
    machine use
      cases and             •   In addition, smartphone 5G use cases will enable emissions savings
 smartphone use                 through behavioural changes (e.g. more online shopping, use of
          cases.                transport apps increased public transport use, etc,).




                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                             132
                                                                                 Realising the Benefits of 5G


         The GPT      The projections in this model are based on current use cases for mobile
         scenario     network technology which are hence most likely a sub-set of the future use
       projections    cases through which 5G could lead to lower emissions. 5G as a GPT
should be viewed      technology would have a much wider set of use cases than 4G, but we do not
as a lower bound      yet have empirical data on the potential for these use cases to lower
                      emissions.
Up to 184 million     Up to 184 million tonnes of CO2 could be saved due to 5G adoption over
  tonnes of CO2       2021-35 according to the GPT scenario results. This emissions saving is
 could be saved       around 30% greater than in the ADT scenario, though as noted above, the
       due to 5G      emissions savings from a GPT scenario could be far greater depending on the
   adoption over      avoided emissions factors of the use cases that emerge in this scenario.
        2021-35

           Avoided    Both the findings from our literature review of environmental benefits of 5G
   emissions are      and the results from the modelling indicate that the greatest environmental
       greatest in    benefits relate to use cases which improve transport efficiency or reduce
consumer groups       travel. Examples of such use cases include smart logistics and traffic
     for which 5G     congestion management (transport consumer group), smart working use
          improves    cases (high speed broadband into offices and home consumer group), and
          transport   mobile shopping applications (retail and hospitality consumer group).
      efficiency or
   reduces travel

      Removing        Consumer groups for which business use cases were modelled are projected
  barriers would      to realise relatively higher emissions savings as a result of removing market
    have larger       barriers, with the highest potential savings in rural industries (73%),
impacts in Rural      manufacturing, logistics and distribution (41%), smart urban (33%) and energy
      industries,     and utilities (32%). In these consumer groups, emissions saving 5G use cases
 Manufacturing,       are mainly business use cases whereas in the other consumer groups, the
   logistics and      modelled use cases are largely 5G consumer smartphone applications, which
    distribution,     have been modelled as having lower market barriers in the central case.
Smart urban and
    Energy and
          utilities

                      9.8     Social impact modelling
    We modelled       The literature review found multiple channels through which 5G will bring
     time savings     social benefits, such as improvements in public safety, improved healthcare
   enabled by 5G      and time savings. However, limited evidence exists on the potential magnitude
                      of the majority of these benefits. Therefore, modelling undertaken in this study
                      was limited to estimating the value of time saved on housework and family
                      care by individuals. The evidence suggests that 5G-enabled features of
                      personal and household IoT devices will result in greater efficiency when
                      doing housework and family care, leading to time savings.
  Removal of 5G       The model estimates (Table 9-3) show that under the General-purpose
  market barriers     technology scenario assumptions, the cumulative value of time saved between
could result in up    2020 and 2035 will reach £19.7bn in the central market barrier case, and
     to £2.4bn of     £22.1bn in the low market barrier case. This means that under the GPT
 additional social    scenario removing the barriers to adoption of 5G could potentially unlock
         benefits     £2.4bn of additional benefits to individuals.

                      Cambridge Econometrics                                                           133
                                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


                     In the advanced digital technology scenario, the cumulative value of social
                     benefits is estimated at £14.9bn in the Central market barrier case, and at
                     £16.7bn in the Low market barrier case. Therefore, under the ADT scenario,
                     removal of barriers to 5G adoption could result in £1.8bn of additional social
                     benefits to individuals.

                     Table 9-3 Cumulative value of social benefits (£bn, 2021-35)

                                              General purpose technology        Advanced digital technology
                                                          (GPT) scenario                    (ADT) scenario
                      Central market                                19.7                               14.9
                      barrier case
                      Low market                                       22.1                                16.7
                      barrier case
                     Source: Modelling by Cambridge Econometrics and Analysys Mason.


These estimates      These estimates are subject to large uncertainty and are particularly sensitive
 are sensitive to    to the assumed additionality of 5G-enabled features of personal and
the choice of 5G     household IoT devices. The study relies on a lower-end estimate of 5G
     additionality   additionality from the literature (attributing only 5% of the potential savings
     assumption      from personal and household 5G-enabled IoT devices to 5G-enabled
                     features). Future research could seek to establish validity of such
                     assumptions, for example by surveying consumers on the value of specific
                     5G-enabled features of their household and personal devices.
         As more     Further research should also aim to explore the methods of valuing other
        evidence     social benefits of 5G, such as improvements in public safety (improved
        becomes      monitoring) and healthcare (patient monitoring). Currently, the evidence on
 available, future   such benefits is available from small trials which may not be representative of
  research could     the potential benefits when 5G is deployed on a wider scale.
    estimate the
                     At the same time, estimates of such benefits also need to address the issue of
social benefits of
                     identifying the additional value of 5G in these applications. Applications
 improved public
                     relating to public safety or healthcare could potentially be supported (fully or
       safety and
                     with limited features) by existing technologies, such as 4G or Wi-Fi. Therefore,
       healthcare
                     only the additional social benefits enabled by 5G should be identified in these
                     estimates.




                     Cambridge Econometrics                                                                  134
                         Realising the Benefits of 5G



Appendices




Cambridge Econometrics                         135
                                                                     Realising the Benefits of 5G




Appendix A Acronyms and Glossary

           A.1      Acronyms


 3GPP                    3rd Generation Partnership Project

 5GTT                    Testbeds and Trials Programme

 AGV                     Autonomous guided vehicle

 AI                      Artificial intelligence

 AR                      Augmented reality

 B2B                     Business-to-business

 B2B2C                   Business-to-business-to-consumer

 B2C                     Business-to-consumer

 BNetzA                  Bundesnetzagentur

 CEPT                    European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications
                         Administrations

 DCMS                    Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport

 eMBB                    Enhanced mobile broadband

 FTIR                    Future Telecoms Infrastructure Review

 FWA                     Fixed wireless access

 IoT                     Internet of things

 LoRa                    Long range

 LPWAN                   Low-power wide-area network

 LTE                     Long-term evolution

 LTE-A                   LTE-advanced

 MBB                     Mobile broadband

 MIMO                    Multiple-input multiple-output

 mMTC                    Massive machine type communications

 MNO                     Mobile network operator



Cambridge Econometrics                                                                     136
                                                                    Realising the Benefits of 5G


 MR                      Mixed reality

 NB-IoT                  Narrowband-IoT

 NR                      New radio

 NSA                     Non standalone

 OTT                     Over the top services

 PoC                     Proof of concept

 QoS                     Quality of service

 RAN                     Radio access network

 RFDI                    Radio frequency identification

 ROI                     Return on investment

 SA                      Standalone

 SIM                     Subscriber identity module

 SLA                     Service level agreement

 SME                     Small medium enterprise

 TCO                     Total cost of ownership

 UAV                     Unmanned aerial vehicles

 UHD                     Ultra-high definition

 URLLC                   Ultra-reliable low-latency communication

 V2X                     Vehicle-to-everything

 VoIP                    Voice over Internet Protocol

 VR                      Virtual reality

 XR                      eXtended reality




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                    137
                                                                        Realising the Benefits of 5G


            A.2      Glossary
 3G RAN                  3rd generation of a radio access network (RAN). (ICF 2020)

 4G RAN                  4th generation of a radio access network (RAN). (ICF 2020)

 5G application          Groups of 5G use cases.

 5G RAN                  5th generation of a radio access network (RAN) (ICF 2020)

 Backhaul                In telecommunications, ‘backhaul’ refers to a communications link
                         connecting the base station to the core network which can transmit data
                         at very fast speeds. Achieving the benefits of 5G will require changes in
                         how a backhaul layer is built (such as multiplying the capacity). (ICF
                         2020)

 Cloud computing         Cloud computing is the delivery of computing services – including
                         servers, storage, databases, networking, software, analytics and
                         intelligence – over the Internet (“the cloud”) (Microsoft Azure 2021).

 Edge computing          Edge computing enables low latency 5G applications by bringing
                         computing capabilities closer to the application.

 Enhanced mobile         Enhanced Mobile Broadband is one of the three primary 5G New Radio
 broadband               use cases defined by the 3GPP as part of its SMARTER (Study on New
                         Services and Markets Technology Enablers) project. The other two are
                         URLLC and mMTC’. Both should be defined herein, although only
                         URLLC appears in this report. (ICF 2020)

 Fixed wireless          Fixed wireless is the operation of wireless communication devices or
                         systems used to connect two fixed locations (e.g., building to building or
                         tower to building) with a radio or other wireless link, such as a laser
                         bridge. (ICF 2020)

 Latency                 Latency, in technical terms, is a time interval between the cause and
                         the effect of some physical change in the system being observed. 5G is
                         designed significantly to reduce network communication delays
                         (latency). Latency has held back technologies that are otherwise
                         technologically ready for 5G. (ICF 2020)

 Machine to machine      A broad label that can be used to describe any technology that enables
 communication           networked devices to exchange information and perform actions without
                         the manual assistance of humans (ICF 2020)

 mmWave                  Millimetre wave (millimetre band) (also known as ‘extremely high
                         frequency) is the band of spectrum between 24 gigahertz to 100 GHz.
                         These high-frequency bands are referred to as ‘mmWave’ due to short
                         wavelengths that can be measured in millimetres. 5G wireless
                         broadband technology is being tested on millimetre wave spectrum and
                         can be used for very high-speed wireless broadband communications
                         (ICF 2020)

 Mobile edge-cloud       Mobile Edge Cloud (MEC) is a network architecture concept that offers
                         a cloud-like capability at the edge of the network. Being close to the end

Cambridge Econometrics                                                                        138
                                                                       Realising the Benefits of 5G


                         users, MECs decrease the latency and increase the performance of
                         high-bandwidth applications (Torre, Doan and Salah 2020).

 NarrowBand-IoT          NarrowBand-IoT (NB-IoT) is a standards-based low power wide area
                         technology developed to enable a wide range of new IoT devices and
                         services. (ICF 2020)

 Network sharing         Network sharing e.g. for MNOs means they are sharing the
                         infrastructure to some degree or other. (ICF 2020)

 Network slicing         Network slicing capabilities (born through 5G networks) will support the
                         provision of end-to-end dedicated capacity and tailored uplink/download
                         speeds

                         Network Slicing is a network architecture that enables service providers
                         to build virtual end-to-end networks tailored to application requirements
                         – the ability to deploy only the functions necessary to support
                         customers and market segments. (ICF 2020)

 NR-Light                Reduced capability NR devices

 Radio access            The RAN consists of the parts of the network associated with radio
 network                 transmission, reception and signal processing which enable wireless
                         communication with the mobile phone or other terminal device. (ICF
                         2020)

 Release 15/16/17        Release 15 is the first full set of 5G standards, includes the 5G system
                         phase 1, machine type of communications, IoT, vehicle to everything
                         communications, WLAN and unlicensed spectrum and system
                         enhancements. Release 16 is the second phase. New features include
                         enhancement of ultra-reliable low latency communications, satellite
                         access in 5G, streaming and TV (ICF 2020)

                         Release 17 is the third phase.

 Radio frequency         Refers to low powered radio systems used for equipment tagging and
 identification          tracking, typically using spectrum identified for "short range device" use

 Spectrum                The 5G spectrum is a range of radio frequencies in the sub-6 gigahertz
                         range and the millimetre-wave frequency range that is 24.25 GHz and
                         above. The 5G spectrum involves the radio frequencies that carry data
                         from user equipment (UE) to cellular base stations to the data’s
                         endpoint. (ICF 2020)

 Virtualisation          Virtualisation refers to the core networks of 5G being implemented in
                         software, rather than in hardware.

 XR                      eXtended reality, including augmented reality AR, virtual reality VR and
                         mixed reality



Source: Analysys Mason



Cambridge Econometrics                                                                       139
                                                                                                  Realising the Benefits of 5G




Appendix B Adoption curves
Table B-1: Projected UK-wide adoption in the GPT and ADT scenarios, central market barrier case




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                  140
                                                                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G


Table B-2: Projected adoption in each UK region and country in the GPT scenario, central market barrier case




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                               141
                                                                                                               Realising the Benefits of 5G


Table B-3: Projected adoption in each UK region and country in the IoT scenario, central market barrier case




Cambridge Econometrics                                                                                                               142
                                                          Realising the Benefits of 5G




Appendix C References


451 Research. 2019. “Multi-Cloud Fundamental to Financial Services
      Transformation.”
5G RuralFirst. 2019. “New Thinking Applied to Rural Connectivity .”
5G.co.uk. 2020. 5G vs 4G: No Contest. 9 March. Accessed March 17, 2021.
       https://5g.co.uk/guides/4g-versus-5g-what-will-the-next-generation-
       bring/.
—. 2020. https://5g.co.uk/guides/4g-versus-5g-what-will-the-next-generation-
      bring/.
2019. “5G-MoNArch project summary.”
5GRIT. 2019b. ““A Year in the Life” of a Wheat Crop.”
5GRIT. 2019c. 5G Rural Integrated Testbed: Final Report – Livestock and
      UAV.
5GRIT. 2019a. “5G Rural Integrated Testbed: D3.2 Final Report - Arable Use
      Cases.”
5GRIT. 2019. “5GRIT Interim Final Report - Tourism.”
Accenture. 2019. “Accelerating 5G In Canada: The Role of 5G in the Fight
      Against Climate Change.”
Accenture. 2018. “Fuel for innovation: Canada’s Path in the Race to 5G.”
ACEEE. 2010. “Advanced Metering Initiatives and Residential Feedback
     Programs: A Meta-Review for Household Electricity-Saving
     Opportunities.”
Analysys Mason and Huawei. 2020. “Green 5G: Building a sustainable world.”
Analysys Mason for CTIA. 2019. “Global race to 5G update.”
Analysys Mason. 2018. “Lowering Barriers to 5G Deployment.”
—. 2018. “Unlocking 5G.” Analysys Mason.
      https://www.analysysmason.com/About-
      Us/News/Newsletter/unlocking-5g-Apr2018/.
Ann Wiliams, Rosemary Kay. n.d. “Liverpool 5G Health and Social Care.”
ARCEP. 2021. News. https://en.arcep.fr/news.html.
Arthur D. Little. 2019. “The Race to 5G.”
AT Kearney. 2016. “The internet of things: a new path to European
      prosperity.”
Atkins. 2016. “Research on the Impacts of Connected and Autonomous
        Vehicles (CAVs) on Traffic Flow.”
Australian Government. 2018. Impacts of 5G on productivity and economic
        growth. Australian Government, The Bureau of Communication and
        Arts Research.
Barclays. 2019. “5G: A transformative technology.”
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Manuel and Trajtenberg. 1995. General purpose
      technologies ‘Engines of growth’? Journal of econometrics.

Cambridge Econometrics                                                          143
                                                          Realising the Benefits of 5G


BT Group PLC. 2021. BT Group PLC - EE wins 80MHz of 5G spectrum.
      https://www.proactiveinvestors.co.uk/LON:BT.A/BT-Group-
      PLC/rns/949042.
Bundesnetzagentur. 2021. Press Releases.
      https://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/EN/General/Press/PressReleases/
      PressRelease_node.html.
Business Leader. 2021. UK LEADS EUROPE IN AI ADOPTION.
      https://www.businessleader.co.uk/uk-leads-europe-in-ai-
      adoption/106911/.
Capgemini. 2019. “5G in industrial operations.”
CEBR. 2016. “The Value of Big Data and the Internet of Things to the UK
      Economy.”
Cerre. 2019. “Ambitions for Europe 2024.”
Christoph Thuemmler, Alois Paulin, Thomas Jell, Ai Keow Lim. 2019. “The
       Impact of 5G on the Evolution of Health and Care Services.”
CIE. 2014. “The economic impacts of mobile broadband on the Australian
       economy, from 2006 to 2013.” Research report prepared for the
       ACMA.
CIF. 2015. “Cloud adoption trends in the UK public sector - 2015.”
CISCO. 2016. Cisco 5G Vision Series: Vertical Value Creation.
computing.co.uk. 2018. https://www.computing.co.uk/feature/3062985/cloud-
      the-picture-in-2018-and-beyond.
Deloitte. 2019. “5G Ecosystem: The digital haven of opportunities .”
Deloitte China. 2018b. “5G: Reshaping the Industries.”
Deloitte. 2019. “Scotland’s digital potential with enhanced 4G and 5G
        capability .”
Deloitte. 2018. “The impacts of mobile broadband and 5G.”
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS). n.d. “5GRIT - 5G
      Project Testbed & Trials Program .”
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS). 2017. “Next
      Generation Mobile Technologies: A 5G Strategy for the UK.”
Digital Catapult. 2019. “Made in 5G: 5G for the UK manufacturing sector.”
Digital Catapult. 2019. “Sector Analysis - 5G Sector Testbeds and Trials.”
dotecon. 2020. “Study on Implications of 5G deployment on business models
      .”
Edquist, Harald, Peter Goodridge, and and Jonathan Haskel. 2021. The
       Internet of Things and economic growth in a panel of countries.
       Economics of Innovation and New Technology.
Environment Agency. 2017. “Climate change agreements - Guidance.”
       Accessed Mar 21, 2019. https://www.gov.uk/guidance/climate-change-
       agreements--2#about-climate-change-agreements.
Ericsson. 2019. “5G for business: a 2030 market compass .”
Ericsson. 2020a. “5G Smart Factory.”
Ericsson. 2020. “Capturing business opportunities beyond mobile broadband.”


Cambridge Econometrics                                                          144
                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


Ericsson. 2020b. “Connected Manufacturing A guide to Industry 4.0
       transformation with private cellular technology.”
Ericsson. 2020. “Port of the future Addressing efficiency and sustainability at
       the Port of Livorno with 5G.”
Ericsson. 2018. “The guide to capturing the 5G industry digitalization business
       potential .”
Ericsson. 2019. “What Industry 4.0 means for manufacturing.”
Ericsson, Arthur D. Little and Chalmers University of Technology. 2013.
       “Socioeconomic effects of broadband speed.”
ESI ThoughtLab. 2021. Driving ROI through AI.
ETNO. 2021. “The State of Digital Communications.”
European 5G Observatory. 2020. 5G private licences spectrum in Europe. 23
      April. Accessed February 2020. https://5gobservatory.eu/5g-private-
      licences-spectrum-in-europe/.
European Commision. 2020b. Commission recommendation.
      https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/commission-
      recommendation-common-union-toolbox-reducing-cost-deploying-very-
      high-capacity.
European Commission. 2018. “A Clean Planet for all: A European strategic
      long-term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate
      neutral economy.” Accessed March 4, 2019.
      https://ec.europa.eu/clima/sites/clima/files/docs/pages/com_2018_733
      _en.pdf.
European Commission. 2016. “Identification and quantification of key socio-
      economic data to support strategic planning for the introduction of 5G
      in Europe.”
Eurostat. 2021. Distribution of population by degree of urbanisation.
       https://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=ilc_lvho01&
       lang=en.
—. 2020.
      http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=isoc_cicce_u
      se.
Fagnant, Daniel J, and Kara Kockelman. 2015. “Preparing a nation for
      autonomous vehicles: opportunities, barriers and policy
      recommendations.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
      Practice.
Forbes. 2020. AI Adoption Survey Shows Surprising Results.
       https://www.forbes.com/sites/cognitiveworld/2020/01/23/ai-adoption-
       survey-shows-surprising-results/.
GeSI. 2015. “GeSI Mobile Carbon Impact.”
GeSi. 2013. “The Enabling Technologies of a Low-Carbon Economy: A Focus
       on Cloud Computing.”
GigaTAG. 2020. “Interim Report.”
GSMA. 2020. “2020 Mobile Industry Impact Report: Sustainable Development
     Goals .”
GSMA. 2018. .”
GSMA. 2019. “The Enablement Effect.”

Cambridge Econometrics                                                            145
                                                          Realising the Benefits of 5G


GSMA. 2020. “The Mobile Economy 2020.” Research report.
     https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/wp-
     content/uploads/2020/03/GSMA_MobileEconomy2020_Global.pdf.
GSMAi. 2021. “Custom Data Search.”
GSMAi. 2020b. “Global Mobile Trends 2021.”
GWS. May 2020. “GWS Survey.”
Harper, Stephen. 2013. Introduction to ‘Big Data'. Environmental Law Institute.
Hasbi, Maude. 2017. “Impact of Very High-Speed Broadband on Local
       Economic Growth: Empirical Evidence.”
HM Government. 2018. “A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the
     Environment.” Accessed February 28, 2019.
     https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/up
     loads/attachment_data/file/693158/25-year-environment-plan.pdf.
Huawei and Oxford Economics. 2019. “Restricting competition in 5G network
      equipment: An economic impact study.”
Huawei. 2020. “Regional and consumer impact of a delayed 5G roll-out.”
Huawei STI. 2019. “5G’s impact on manufacturing: $740BN of benefits in 2030
      .”
Huawei STI Partners. 2019. “$1.4TN of benefits in 2030: 5G’s impact on
      industry verticals .”
IBM. Undated. “Miami-Dade County: Building a smarter, safer county with
      intelligent, analytics-driven operations management.”
ICF. 2020. “Process and Early Impact Evaluation of the 5G Testbeds and
       Trials Programme Case Study Annex.”
IFR. 2020. “IFR Press Conference.”
IHS. 2017. “The 5G economy: How 5G technology will contribute to the global
       economy .”
IHS. 2019. “The 5G economy: How 5G will contribute to the global economy .”
inCites Consulting. 2019. “Europe 5G Readiness index.”
Infosys. 2019. “State of 5G – the road ahead .”
Intel. 2018. “How 5G Will Transform the Business of Media and
        Entertainment.”
IPSOS Mori. 2018. “Evaluation of the Economic Impact and Public Value of
      the Superfast Broadband Programme.”
ITU. 2018. “The economic contribution of broadband, digitization and ICT
       regulation.”
Koutroumpis, Pantelis. 2018. “The economic impact of broadband: evidence
       from OECD countries.”
KPMG. 2015. “Connected and Autonomous Vehicles – The UK Economic
     Opportunity.”
LECG. 2009. “Economic Impact of Broadband: An Empirical Study.”
Little, Arthur D. 2019. “The Race to 5G.”
Liverpool 5G Testbed. 2019. “Benefits, Outcomes and Impact: Final analysis
       of combined data from use cases.”


Cambridge Econometrics                                                          146
                                                            Realising the Benefits of 5G


McKinsey Global Institute. 2017. “ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE THE NEXT
      DIGITAL FRONTIER?”
Mckinsey. n.d. “The 5G era.”
McKinsey. 2015. “The Internet of Things - Mapping the value beyond the
      hype.”
Microsoft. n.d.
Microsoft Azure. 2021. What is cloud computing.
       https://azure.microsoft.com/en-gb/overview/what-is-cloud-computing/.
Microsoft. 2019. “Microsoft New Centre.” Micrsoft. 30 July. Accessed March 1,
       2021. https://news.microsoft.com/en-gb/2019/07/30/uk-risks-falling-
       behind-in-iot-race-microsoft-research-suggests/.
Mobilise Global. 2019. 5G – An Opportunity or Threat for MVNOs?
Nokia. 2020c. “5G – ready for business.”
Nokia and Telefonica. 2020. “Nokia confirms 5G as 90 percent more energy
       efficient.”
Nokia. 2020. “Mapping demand: The 5G opportunity in enterprise for
       communications service providers.”
Nokia. 2020b. “The value of 5G services.”
Nokia. 2020. .”
Nokia. 2020. “Why 5G in Latin America.”
O2. 2018. “The value of 5G for cities and communities.”
OECD. 2019. “The Road to 5G networks.”
Ofcom. 2021. Award of 700 MHz and 3.6-3.8 GHz spectrum by auction -
      Press release. https://www.ofcom.org.uk/spectrum/spectrum-
      management/spectrum-awards/awards-in-progress/700-mhz-and-3.6-
      3.8-ghz-auction.
Ofcom. 2020. “Customer Satisfaction survey.”
Ofcom. 2019. “Enabling wireless innovation through local licensing: Shared
      access to spectrum supporting mobile technology.”
OMDIA. 2020. “5G Market Progress.”
ONS. 2018. “Input–output supply and use tables.” ONS.
Opensignal. 2019. “The State of Mobile Network Experience.”
Oxera. 2019. “Impact at a local level of full-fibre and 5G investments.”
Prieger, James E. 2020. “An Economic Analysis of 5G Wireless Deployment:
       Impact on the U.S. and Local Economies.”
Productivity Commission. 2004. “ICT Use and Productivity: A Synthesis from
      Studies of Australian Firms.”
Qiang, Christine Zhen-Wei, Carlo M. Rossotto, and and Kaoru Kimura. 2009.
       Economic impacts of broadband. Information and communications for
       development 2009: Extending reach and increasing impact 3 (2009):
       35-50.
Raconteur. 2020. “Future of 5G.”
Sarraf, Saman. 2019. “5G Emerging Technology and Affected Industries:
        Quick Survey.” American Scientific Research Journal for Engineering,
        Technology, and Sciences (ASRJETS).
Cambridge Econometrics                                                    147
                                                           Realising the Benefits of 5G


Stansfeld, Mark. 2020. “5G: The Driver for UK Productivity .”
STL Partners and Huawei. 2019. “$1.4tn of Benefits in 2030: 5G’s Impact on
      Industry Verticals.”
STL Partners and Huawei. 2019. “5G’S Impact on Manufacturing: $740bn of
      Benefits in 2030.”
Telefónica. 2020. “Benefits of 5G in Industry 4.0 .”
Torre, Roberto, Tung Doan, and Hani Salah. 2020. Computing in
       Communication Networks.
Verbooy, Kaya, Renske Hoefman, Job van Exel, and Werner Brouwer. 2018.
      “Time Is Money: Investigating the Value of Leisure Time and Unpaid
      Work.” Value in Health 1428-1436.
Vodafone. 2019. “ IoT Barometer 2019.”
Vodafone. 2020. “Levelling up.”
W5G. 2020. “Worcestershire 5G Testbeds and Trials: Final report.”
Which? 2020. “Consumer attitudes towarsd gigbit-capable broadband.”
WIK. 2020. “Moving to a fibre-enabled UK: International experiences on
      barriers to gigabit adoption.”
Wireless, Real. 2019. “5G Mobile Network Architecture for diverse services,
       use cases, and applications in 5G and beyond - Deliverable D6.3 -
       Final report on architectural verification and validation.”
World Economic Forum. 2019. “5G-Next Generation Networks Programme
       Repository of use cases .”




Cambridge Econometrics                                                           148
